abdomen (adj., abdominal) The principal
posterior division of the body, posterior to the
leg-bearing segments and composed of 10 or
fewer apparent segments; in most Symphyta
abdominal segment 1 is easily recognized by its
median split (cf. metasoma, propodeum).
abscissa (pI., abscissae) A segment of a wing vein
that is delimited by the intersection of other
veins.
acute Sharply angled, less than 90 degrees.
adventitious vein A wing vein that is not
homologized with a standard wing vein.
annulate Ringed; formed in ring-like segments or
color patterns.
antenna (pI., antennae; adj., antennal) A paired,
segmented sensory appendage of the head
between the compound eyes, which consists of
three segments having intrinsic muscles (see
also scape, pedicel, and flagellum).
apex (pl., apices; adj., apical, apico-) Part of a
structure farthest from its point of attachment
to the body.
areola (pl., areolae; adj., areolate) In
Ichneumonidae, the median area of the
propodeum that is enclosed by ridges.
areolet In Ichneumonidae, the small cell in the
centre of the fore wing; the first radial sector
cell.
arolium (pl., arolia) A pad-like median lobe
between the tarsal claws (see also pretarsus).
axilla (pl., axillae; adj., axillar) In groups with a
transscutal articulation, posterolateral portion
of the mesoscutum separated from the
mesoscutum lateral to the scutellum; usually
triangular (see also scutum).
axillula (pl., axillulae; adj., axillular) In
Chalcidoidea, the lateral subdivision of the
scutellum delimited by a longitudinal line.
base (adj., basal, basi-) Part of a structure nearest
to its point of attachment to the body.
basitibial plate In Apoidea, a small, flat, hairless,
raised region of the dorsal surface of the
metatibia at its base.
bulla (pl., bullae) In Ichneumonidae,
unpigmented area of a vein where it is crossed
by a wing fold or line of flexion.
cardo (pI., cardines) The basal part of the maxilla.
carina (pI., carinae; adj., carinate) A ridge or
raised line.
cell The area between the veins of a wing; it is
closed when completely surrounded by veins,
otherwise it is open (see morphology section
for naming of cells).
cenchrus (pt., cenchri) In Symphyta, a paired,
circular, or oval structure on the sublateral
portion of the metascutum.
cercus (pI., cerci; adj., cereal) A paired, posterior,
sensory appendage of the last (morphological
tenth) abdominal tergum, which usually bears
several setae. With a reduction of the apical
segments of the metasoma, the cerci often
appear to be on a more anterior segment.
chela (pI., chelae; adj., chelate) In Dryinidae, the
modified tarsus in which the apical tarsomere
forms a clasping structure with its opposable
tarsal claw; a pincer.
claval fold The furrow on the fore wing just
anterior to, and parallel with, vein lA, and
extending to the claval notch on the wing
margin.
claval lobe The posterior portion of a wing behind
the claval fold and in front of the jugal fold,
when present (see also jugal lobe).
club The enlarged apical flagellomere or
flagellomeres of an antenna (see also funicle).
clypeus (adj., clypeal) The medial sclerite of the
head immediately above the labrum; often
defined dorsally and laterally by the epistomal
groove.
compressed Flattened from side to side (higher
than wide).
concave Pertaining to a linear structure, margin,
or surface that is curved inward (cf. convex).
convex Pertaining to a linear structure, margin, or
surface that is curved outward (cf. concave).
corbicula (pI., corbiculae) In Apiformes, the
concave, smooth region of the metatibia that is
margined by a fringe of setae arising from the
margins; it forms a pollen basket.
costal notch The excision of the wing margin
between the apex of the costal vein and the
base of the stigma.
coxa (pI., coxae; adj., coxal) The first segment of a
leg, between the body and the trochanter.
epicnemium (adj., epicnemial) The anterior
portion of the mesopleuron delimited
posteriorly by the epicnemial carina (see also
prepectus).
epimeron (pt., epimera; adj., epimeral) The
portion of a pleuron posterior to the pleural
groove (cf. episternum).
epipygium In Chalcidoidea, a small, more or less
sclerotized, fingernail-like flap attached to the
last metasomal tergum between the cerci.
episternal groove See mesepisternal groove.
episternum (pt., episterna; adj., episternal) The
portion of a pleuron anterior to the pleural
groove (cf. epimeron).
depressed Flattened from top to bottom (wider
than high).
disc (adj., discal) The central surface of any
structure.
emarginate Notched; with an obtuse, rounded, or
quadrate section cut out of a margin.
endodont mandible A mandible with the teeth
facing inward so that when the mandibles are
closed their tips point toward each other's base
(cf. exodont).
epicnemial carina The ridge on the mesopleuron
that more or less parallels the anterior margin
of the mesepisternum and that delineates the
posterior margin of the epicnemium.
epistomal groove A groove defining the lateral
and dorsal margin of the clypeus.
epomia (pI., epomiae) In Ichneumonoidea, an
oblique ridge crossing the transverse furrow on
the side of the pronotum.
exodont mandible A mandible with the teeth
facing outward so that when the mandibles are
closed their tips point anteriorly or away from
each other (cf. endodont).
face (adj., facial) In Parasitica, the anterior
surface of the head between the eyes from the
ventral margin of the toruli to the oral cavity,
excluding the clypeus; in Symphyta and
Aculeata, anterior surface of the head between
the eyes from the ocelli to the oral cavity,
including the clypeus.
facial fovea In Apoidea, a depressed, often finely
and densely pubescent area along the inner
orbit of a compound eye.
felt line In Mutillidae and Bradynobaenidae, a
longitudinal line of flattened setae and
secretory pores laterally on metasomal
tergum 2.
femur (pI., femora; adj., femoral) The third
segment of a leg, between the trochanter and
tibia.
flabellum (pI., flabella) In Apiformes, a small thin
plate at the apex of the glossa.
flagellomere A segment-like subdivision of the
flagellum; it is numbered consecutively from
the base of the flagellum.
flagellum (pI., flagella; adj., flagellar) The third
primary division or segment of the antenna; it
articulates with the pedicel basally and almost
always is subdivided into flagellomeres.
foramen (pI., foramina) A hole in the body wall
through which vessels or nerves pass. The
foramen magnum is the central hole in the back
of the head; the propodeal foramen is the hole
in the posterior area of the propodeum.
frenum (pI., frena; adj., frenal) In Chalcidoidea,
the transverse line on the scutellum that
delineates a posterior portion of the scutellum,
the frenal area.
frons The area of the head between the ventral
margin of the toruli and the anterior margin of
the median ocellus. (Note: this is not equivalent
to the true frons of larvae.)
frontal carina A longitudinal ridge or pair of
ridges on the frons between (and sometimes
partly covering) the toruli.
funicle (adj., funicular) A group of flagellomeres
between the pedicel and the club.
galea (pl., galeae) The outer apical lobe of the
maxilla, articulated basally with the stipes.
gastrocoelus-thyridium (pl., gastrocoeli) In
Ichneumonidae, the usually transverse
impression anterolaterally on metasomal
tergum 2. The gastrocoelus includes the
thyridium (t), which is the surface area with
specialized sculpture, whereas the gastrocoelus
is the impression itself.
gena (pl., genae; adj., genal) The cheek; the
lateral part of the head between the compound
eye and, when present, the occipital carina;
otherwise, the lower (in hypognathous head) or
anterior (in prognathous head) part of the back
of the head between the compound eye and the
occiput.
glossa (pI., glossae) The paired, fused, median
lobe of the labium articulated basally with the
prementum.
glymma (pI., glymmae) In Ichneumonidae, the
paired groove or pit on the side of metasomal
segment 1 between its base and the spiracle; it
is nearly always present when sternum 1 is free
from tergum 1 but absent when tergum 1 and
sternum 1 are fused.
groove A linear impression on a sclerite (see also
suture).
hamulus (pI., hamuli) One of a series of small
bristle-like hooks on the anterior margin of the
hind wing; in some groups there may be a basal
and an apical series of hamuli.
head The principal anterior division of the body;
it bears the mouthparts and antennae.
humeral plate The anterior sclerite of the wing at
the base of vein C.
hypognathous With the head more or less at a
right angle to the plane of the body (vertical),
so the mouthparts are directed ventrally (cf.
prognathous ).
hypopygium (adj., hypopygial) The last visible
sternum of the abdomen.
hypostomal bridge The sclerotized posterior part
of the head that sometimes separates the
foramen magnum from the oral cavity (the
bridge may sometimes be formed by the
median fusion of the postgena or gena and is
then called the postgenal or genal bridge).
hypostomal carina The ridge on the back of the
head along the oral cavity that normally
delimits the hypostoma from the postgena and
occiput.
jugal lobe The posterior area of the wing behind
vein lA and set off from more anterior areas by
a slight fold Gugal fold) on the wing and by a
notch on the wing margin (see also claval lobe).
labium (adj., labial) The posterior, medial
appendage of the mouthparts between and
behind the maxillae, composed of the
submentum, mentum, prementum, glossa,
paraglossa, and labial palpi.
labrum (adj., labral) The anterior, medial
appendage of the mouthparts attached to the
underside of, and often concealed by, the
clypeus.
mandible (adj., mandibular) The paired, heavily
sclerotized biting and chewing lateral
appendage of the mouthparts between the
labrum and maxilla.
maxilla (pI., maxillae;' adj., maxillary) The paired
appendage of the mouthparts between the
mandible and labium, consisting of the cardo,
stipes, lacinia, galea, and maxillary palpus.
mentum A labial sclerite articulating basally with
the submentum and apically with the
prementum; often fused with the latter and
indistinguishable as a separate sclerite.
lamina (pl., laminae; adj., laminate) A thin plate
or leaf-like process.
laterotergite The lateral part of an
abdominallmetasomal tergum that is marked by
a crease or groove, or is even completely
detached from the main dorsal part of the
tergum (see also tergite, tergum).
lacinia (pl., laciniae) The inner apical lobe of the
maxilla, articulated to the stipes.
malar space The shortest distance between the
base of the mandible and the margin of the
compound eye.
mes-, meso- A Greek prefix meaning middle or
mid; used with Latin, latinized, or Greek words
to indicate the middle (often second) part of a
structure.
mesepimeron The posterior subdivision of the
mesopleuron, usually small relative to the
mesepisternum or almost absent.
mesepisternal groove A groove on the
mesopleuron, extending ventrally from a pit
under the base of the fore wing and, when
complete, reaching the anteroventral margin of
the mesothorax.
mesepisternum The anterior subdivision of the
mesopleuron, usually comprising most of the
mesopleuron.
mesonotum The dorsal part of the mesothorax.
pedicel The second primary division or segment of
the antenna; it articulates apically with the
flagellum and basally with the scape.
pedunculate An intermediate, club-like condition
between sessile and petiolate (see also
petiolate ).
petiolate Stalked.
petiole Part of the metasoma, usually metasomal
segment 1; the usually narrow, parallel-sided
stalk joining the rest of the metasoma to the
propodeum.
placoid sensillum (pI., sensilla) An elongate,
appressed, plate-like or rounded roof-like or
groove-like sensory structure; it is usually
mentioned when referring to the flagellomeres.
plantar lobe A small membranous pad projecting
from the ventral apex of tarsomeres 1-4.
pleural groove A groove on the mesopleuron and
metapleuron extending between the wing base
and the coxal articulation; it separates the
episternum from the epimeron.
pleuron (pI., pleura; adj., pleural) The lateral part
of a body segment, commonly of a thoracic
segment where the pleuron occupies the lateral
as well as the ventral areas of the mesothorax
and metathorax.
posterior lingual plate A sclerite on the posterior
(ventral) surface of the glossa.
postgena (adj., postgenal) The lower part of the
occiput; when the occipital carina is absent, the
gena and postgena are continuous, and the
entire lower area constitutes the gena (see also
occiput).
postnotum A posterior sclerite of the mesonotum
and metanotum behind the scutellum. The
postnotum of the metathorax is fused dorsally
with abdominal tergum 1 and laterally with the
metepimeron; in Apocrita the postnotum is
rarely visible, and then only as an impressed
line in front of the propodeum.
postocciput (adj., postoccipital) A narrow area
surrounding the foramen magnum; it is
separated from the occiput by the postoccipital
groove.
postpectal carina In Ichneumonoidea, the
posterior transverse carina ventrallY on the
mesopleuron, just in front of the mesocoxa.
prementum A labial sclerite articulating basally
with the mentum and bearing the glossae,
paraglossae, and palpi apically.
prepectus A sclerite of the thorax between the
pronotum and the mesepisternum (see also
epicnemium).
prestigma The enlarged and sclerotized apex of
one or more veins on the anterior margin of the
wing basal to the costal notch and almost
continuous with the stigma.
pronotal collar The horizontal surface of the
pronotum posterior to the sloping, and often
narrowing, region immediately behind the
head.
pretarsus The apical segment of a leg, bearing the
claws and associated structures (see also
arolium). pronotal flange The anterior projecting rim of the
pronotum; it is often hidden by the head.
pronotallobe The rounded posterolateral
extension of the pronotum covering the
mesothoracic spiracle.
pro- A Latin prefix meaning before or anterior;
used with Latin, latinized, or Greek words to
indicate the anterior (usually first) part of a
structure.
prognathous With the head more or less in the
same plane as the body (horizontal) so the
mouthparts are directed anteriorly (cf.
hypognathous ).
pronotal plate In Cynipoidea, the dorsal disc of
the pronotum.
pronotum (adj., pronotal) The dorsal sclerite of
the prothorax; in most Hymenoptera,
occupying also the dorsolateral or lateral part
of the prothorax.
propleuron (pl., propleura) The lateral part of the
prothorax. In Hymenoptera, it is displaced
somewhat by the pronotum so as to occupy an
oblique position ventrolateral and anterior to
the pronotum.
propodeal carina In Ichneumonoidea, one or
more named, usually distinct, transverse or
longitudinal ridges on the propodeum.
propodeum (adj., propodeal) In Apocrita, the first
tergum of the abdomen, widely and immovably
fused with the metanotum and with each
metapleuron of the thorax, and usually
narrowly and flexibly joined to the rest of the
abdomen (see also abdomen, metasoma,
thorax).
prosternum A ventral sclerite of the prothorax,
between the propleura.
prothorax The first of the three primary
subdivisions of the thorax, composed of the
pronotum, the propleuron, and the prosternum.
pubescence The short, fine, often closely set setae
on the body.
punctate Bearing fine, impressed points or pits.
pygidial plate A specialized area of the tergum of
the last externally visible segment of the
metasoma; it is usually flattened and defined
laterally by ridges or grooves.
radicle The basal part of the scape often strongly
defined by a constriction; it articulates with the
torulus.
recumbent Referring to a seta lying parallel to the
body surface.
reticulate Covered with a network of lines;
meshed.
scape The first primary division or segment of the
antenna; it articulates apically with the pedicel
and basally with the torulus.
sclerite A hardened plate of the integument; it is
separated from other such plates by sutures or
membrane.
sclerotized Referring to the body integument;
relatively stiff and usually darkly pigmented
areas compared with usually colorless and
flexible membranous areas.
scopa (pI., scopae) In Apiformes, a brush-like
structure of short stiff hairs of equal length
used for collecting pollen.
scrobal groove A horizontal groove on the
mesopleuron that may be continuous with the
episternal groove anteriorly and ends at the
pleural groove posteriorly.
scrobe (adj., scrobal) A groove in the body
integument for the reception or concealment of
an appendage, e.g., a longitudinal depression of
the head above each torulus for reception of
the scape or a groove on the mesopleuron for
reception of the mesofemur; the scrobe of the
mesepisternum is a small pit.
sculpture Markings or a pattern of impressions or
elevations on the surface of a structure.
scutellum (pl., scutella; adj., scutellar) The middle
region of the mesonotum or metanotum,
behind the scutum. In Apocrita, only the
mesoscutellum is evident and is simply called
the scutellum, whereas in Symphyta both the
mesoscutellum and metascutellum are present.
scutum (pl., scuta; adj., scutal) The anterior
sclerite of a notum, in front of the scutellum. In
Apocrita, the mesoscutum is functionally only
the area in front of the transscutal articulation;
the axilla, although morphologically part of the
mesoscutum, is treated as separate (see also
axilla).
segment A ring or subdivision of the body or of an
appendage between areas of flexibility, and
bearing intrinsic muscles.
sensillum (pl., sensilla) A simple sense organ,
such as a seta, or one of the structural units of a
compound sense organ.
sessile One structure attached to another, without
a distinct constriction (cf. pedunculate,
petiolate ).
seta (pl., setae; adj., setal) A slender, hair-like,
usually sensory extension of the cuticle,
connected to the body wall by a socket.
spectral vein A wing vein that is indicated only by
a ridge or furrow on the wing surface; it has no
trace of pigment and can only be seen with
reflected light (cf. tubular, nebulous veins).
spiracle (adj., spiracular) A small, round or oval
lateral opening on a body segment through
which air enters the tracheae.
sternaulus (pI., sternauli) The horizontal
lateroventral carina or groove near the lower
margin of the mesopleuron, extending from the
lower end of the epicnemial carina toward the
mesocoxa.
sternite The sclerotized subdivision of a sternum
bounded by grooves or by membranous lines or
areas (see also sternum).
sternum (pI., sterna; adj., sternal) The ventral
division of a body segment, which may be
subdivided into sternites; usually only refers to
the segments of the abdomen/metasoma and to
the prothorax. The sterna of the mesothorax
and metathorax are considered to be
invaginated within the thorax.
stigma A thickly sclerotized and usually darkly
pigmented area on the fore wing margin at the
apex of the costal vein. In Chalcidoidea, a
knob-like enlargement of the apex of the
stigmal vein.
stipes (pI., stipites; adj., stipital) A major sclerite
of the maxilla, articulating basally with the
cardo, apically with the galea and lacinia, and
laterally with the maxillary palpus.
sub- Latin prefix meaning under; also used
commonly to mean somewhat or almost (e.g.,
subequal is synonymous with almost equal).
subantennal groove In Apiformes, one or two fine
grooves between the torulus and the clypeus.
subgenal carina A ridge bordering the gena
ventrally; it extends from the hypostomal carina
to the anterior or facial articulation of the
mandible.
submentum The basal sclerite of the labium
articulating apically with the mentum; in
Apoidea, an often V-shaped sclerite (often
called the lorum) with an arm articulating with
each cardo and medially articulating with the
mentum.
submetapleural carina A ridge on the ventral
margin of the lower part of the metapleuron,
between the bases of the mesocoxae and
metacoxae.
subocular groove A groove extending from the
ventral margin of the eye to the anterior or
facial articulation of the mandible.
suture A line or membranous area on the cuticle
indicating the junction of two formerly separate
plates or sclerites (see also groo.ve).
tarsomere A subdivision of the tarsus; each tarsus
has 3-5 tarsomeres.
tarsus (pI., tarsi; adj., tarsal) The fifth segment of
a leg, attached basally to the tibia and
subdivided into tarsomeres.
tibia (pI., tibiae; adj., tibial) The fourth segment
of a leg, between the femur and the tarsus.
tibial spur A spine-like, multicellular extension of
the cuticle connected to an appendage by a
socket; usually found apically on the tibiae.
torulus (pI., toruli) A paired socket on the front
of the head upon which the scape is articulated.
transscutal articulation A line of weakness across
the mesonotum between the fore wing bases,
which secondarily separates the posterolateral
angles of the mesoscutum beside the scutellum
(see also axilla, scutum).
trochantellus The basal end of the femur; it looks
like a second segment of the trochanter.
tergite A sclerotized subdivision of a tergum
bounded by grooves, or membranous lines or
areas (see also laterotergite, tergum).
tergum (pI., terga; adj., tergal) A dorsal sclerite of
a body segment, which may be subdivided into
tergites; specifically used for the
abdomen/metasoma (see also laterotergite).
tegula (pI., tegulae) A small, scale-like sclerite
covering the base of the fore wing, basal to the
humeral plate.
thorax (pI., thoraces; adj., thoracic) The principal
middle division of the body to which the legs
are attached, between the head and abdomen
(cf. mesosoma).
thyridium See gastrocoelus.
trochanter The second segment of a leg, between
the coxa and femur.
truncate Cut off squarely at the tip.
tubular vein A pigmented wing vein that is hollow
and therefore appears darker laterally and
lighter medially; it can be seen with both
reflected and transmitted light (cf. nebulous,
spectral veins).
uncus In Chalcidoidea, a short, narrow stub near
the apex of the stigmal vein directed towards
the postmarginal vein.
vein (adj., veinal) Narrow, usually dark
thickenings of a wing arising at the wing base
and branching towards the apex (see also
nebulous, spectral, tubular veins, and
morphology section for naming of veins).
vertex The top of the head between the eyes, from
the anterior margin of the median ocellus to
the occiput.
volsella (pI., volsellae) . A paired, median inner
appendage of the male genitalia.