 V"\., Q,l+r e^^
The Bee Genera of North
and Central America
(Flfnenoptera: Ap.idea)
2nd edition
Beta version; Arrgust 1 ,2022
Bryan Danforth, Sean Brady, Silas Bossert,
Eduardo Almeida, Jason Gibbs, Jack Neff, Terry Grisr,n old, ,
Laurence Packer, Ronald J. McGinley, Charles D. Michener fversion 010822) INDEX
Chapter 1 -- The importance of bees
Chapter 2 -The scope and use of this book
Chapter 3 -- The changing view of bee phylogeny and classification
Chapter 4 - Aprimer on bee morphology
Chapter 5 - Locators for the key(s) to genera (You can also start here)
Chapter 6 - Key to the Genera (main key) -- START HERE
Chapter 7 -Key to Genera of Meliponini
Chapter 8 - Key to Genera of Halictinae
Chapter 9 - Key to Genera of Eucerini
Chapter 10 - Key to Genera of Anthidiini
Chapter 11 - Key to the families
Chapter 12 - Notes on the Genera
Appendix I -- Complete list of figures and figure captions
Appendix 2 -- Anticipated classificatory changes (if there are any)
Literature cited - complete list of references citedv
v
v
v
v
v
\, Acknowledgements - We are extremely grateful to Elain Hodges (Smithsonian Institution) for
preparing the artwork in the first edition of this book, and to Karolyn Darrow (Smithsonian
Institution) for preparing the revised and updated digital artwork, including line drawings and
habitus photos. Rachel Fordyce (Cornell University) helped immensely with editing and
formatting of keys and other materials. For color habitus photos, we thank Jakob Musafia,
Claudia Ratti and particularly Liam Graham (York University). Their work was financially
supported by Cecily and Robert Bradshau,, to whom we are extremely grateful. Jerry Rozen,
Achik Dorchin, Felipe Freitas, Rodrigo Gongalves, and Maurizio Femandez generously provided
taxonomic expertise on certain groups. We are grateful to the instructors and students at the Bee
Course, a ten-day workshop on bee systematics, biology, and ecology that has been offered at the
Southwestern Research Station since 1999, for their ongoing contributions to this work. We are
exceptionally grateful to Charles D. Michener for developing the concept, framework, original
keys, and associated background material for this book, and for his immense contributions to the
field of bee systematics, evolution, and taxonomy. vChapter I -- The importance of bees
o describe why bees are so important ecologically in both natural and agricultural habitats
o mention the uptick in interest due to the 200712008 CCD crisis
o describe the blossoming of interest in non-managed and wild bees in the importance of
being able to identifu bees for biotic survey work
o mentioned economic value of wild bees to crop pollination
o mention PCAM and the Bee Course as two major drivers for development of this booko mention Empire State Native Pollinator Survey and the Oregon State Bee Atlas - and
other state-wide efforts
o mention USDA-RCN project on national bee survey
o endangered bees - importance of identifzing them
o mention how fascinating bees are including their close association with flowing plants
(and host-plant specialization), brood parasitic bees, diversity in nesting biology, range of
social behaviors, and their ecological associations with other organisms (mites,
nematodes, and other insects) Chapter 2 - The scope and use of this book
o explain geographic scope and include map; include Orr et al.202l map of species
richness in N. America?
o mention how many species and genera occur in our area (referring to Table 1; perhaps
also make a figure summarizing species richness across subfamilies)
o describe how to use the keys, locators, etc. - indicate that it would be a good idea to put a
post-it note flagging the start of each sub-key (chapters 7-10)
o explain the importance of understanding morphology and recommend that readers use the
chapter on bee morphology (Chapter 4) to learn these key terms.
o describe what to do once you have identified a bee to genus; resources for species-level
identification (see'Notes on the Genera"); including (1) revisions, (2) online keys
(Discover Life, Terry's key to megachilid genera, etc.)
o also mention how the book has changed from the earlier edition
o send reader to Sam Droege's The Very Hand,v Manual for information on collecting
techniques, pinning and specimen preparation
o mention other resources as well: The Bees in Your Backltard (Wilson & Carril 2015),
Common Bees of Eastern North America (Carril & Wilson 2021)
o direct readers in eastern Canada and the northeastern United States to Packer et al.
(2007): Packer L, Genaro JA, Sheffield CS. 2007 . The bee genera of eastem Canada.
Canadian Journal of Arthropod Identification. 3(3):1-32
Table 2-1 -- the current classification of bee genera in North and Central America with number
ofspecies for each genus (and notes on their biology?)
Fig. 2-l - map of North American bee species richness (from Orr et al.202l)
Fig. 2-2 - Species richness and oligolecty in the USA by state; data from Fowler website [?]
Fig. 2-2 - histogram of species richness across the subfamilies in N. America (from Table 2- 1)v
v v
\,
v
vChapter 3 -- The changing view of bee phylogeny and classification
o outline how bee phylogeny has changed through improved methods and additional
(mostly molecular) data sets
o describe our new view of bee origins from crabronid wasps
o describe the family level phylogeny of bees and how it has changed over timeo discuss the relationships among subfamilies within the seven farnilies (including
phylogenies at the subfamily level)
o go family by family and outline what has changed in the classification -- new
subfamilies, placement of tribes and genera, elevation/removal of genera and subgenera
[mention Lasioglossum as an example of one genus that has undergone significant change
at the subgeneric and generic levels]; also highlight massive changes in Apidae
o highlight challenges and controversies with Megachile (many genera or just one) and
Andrena and the massive number of paraphyletic subgenera (Pisanti et aL.2020)
Fig. j-l -- phylogeny of bees relative to apoid wasps
Fig. 3-2 -- phylogeny of bee families
Fig. 3-3 -- histogram of the number of described species across subfamilies in our area (from
Table 1)
Fig. j-4 - Relationships among subfamilies in Melittidae with histogram of number of described
species worldwide
Fig. j-5 - Relationships among subfamilies in Apidae with histogram of number of described
species worldwide
Fig. 3-6 - Relationships among subfamilies in Megachilidae with histogram of number of
described species worldwide
Fig. 3-7 - Relationships among subfamilies in Andrenidae with histogram of number of
described species worldwide
Fig. j-8 - Relationships among subfamilies in Halictidae with histogram of number of described
species worldwide
Fig. j-9 - Relationships among subfamilies in Colletidae with histogram of number of described
species worldwide
Sample text: No other family of bees has undergone as much change in the classification as the
family Apidae (as currently construed). In the first edition of this book we recognized two
families: Apidae (including the four corbiculate bees [Euglossini, Bombini, Meliponini, and
Apini]) and "Anthophoridae", which included all the remaining groups. In the 1990's
morphological studies by Roig-Alsina and Michener (1993) revealed that the corbiculate bees
arise from within the group referred to as "Anthophoridae". This rendered the "Anthophoridae" a
paraphyletic group and modern systematic classifications prefer to recognize only monophyletic
groups (i.e., groups that include all the descendants of single common ancestor). Roig-Alsina and
Michener (1993) chose to expand Apidae to include all the subfamilies, tribes, and genera previously placed in "Anthophoridae" and they recognized three subfamilies: Apinae (expanded
to include the four corbiculate tribes as well as many others formerly in "Anthophoridae"),
Nomadinae (an exclusively brood-parasitic group), and Xylocopinae (the allodapine and
carpenter bees). But the story does not end there. Subsequent molecular and morphological
studies (Cardinal et al. 2010) revealed that many tribes of brood parasites that were considered
part of Apinae (provide list) were, in fact, closely related to the brood parasites in the subfamily
Nomadinae. Furthermore, both Nomadinae and Xylocopinae rendered Apinae paraphyletic.
Bossert et al. (2018) fuither resolved relationships in Apidae and provided what is now the
current classification recognizing five, rnonophyletic subfamilies of Apidae (Anthophorinae,
Nomadinae, Eucerinae, Apinae, and Xylocopinae ).v
v
V
v
v v
v
v
v
\,
v
vTABLE 2-1 - Classification of theera
GENUS TRIBE SUBFAMILY FAMILY No.
A 4
Andrena s081
2Andrenini
Andrenini rAndreninaeAndreninae Andrenidae
Andrenidae
aJMegandrena Andrenini Andreninae ,Andrenidae 2
4 Mesoxaea Oxaeini Oxaeinae Andrenidae l
5 Oxaea 'Oxaeini Oxaeinae Andrenidae l
I1
6
7a
PanurginaePanurginae
) Ps eudomacrotera Perditini
Protandrena
DeltoptilaOxaeinae J
)
Protandrenini Panurginae
6 Anthophorini Arthophorinaedae
dae
636Perditini
PerditiniAndrenidae
AndrenidaeAndrenidae
Panurginae
PanurginaeMacrotera
Perdita8
t49
13l0
t21l
Andrenidae
Apidaedae79
31l8
6451Protoxaea
PanurginusCall, l,s
Panurgini,Oxaeini
15 Habropoda Anthophorini Anthophorinae Apidae 17
l6 Apis Apini Apinae Apidae I
A Bombus
aCentrist7
2018
t9 EpicharisBombini
Centridini
Centridinilnae
lnae
Apidaedae
Apidae
dae65
187
l0 Apinae
Apinae
21Eufriesea rEuglossini Apinae Apidae 25
22 Euglossa Euglossini Apinae Apidae 48
23 Eulaema Euglossini Apinae Apidae 8
24 Exaerete Euglossini Apinae Apidae 5
25Aparatrigona Meliponini Apinae Apidae I
26
27
281J
?
2dae
ApidaeMeli
Meliponini Dolichotrigona
FrieseomelittaApinae
Meliponini Apidae Apinae
29 Geotrigona rApidae 5 Meliponini Apinae
30Lestrimelitta Meliponini lApinae Apidae 4
31Melipona Meliponini lApinae Apidae t7
Apinae
Apinae1
2
2Apidae32
34JJMeliwillea
NogueirapisMeliponini
MeliponiniMeliApidae
A
35Oxytrigona Meliponini Apinae Apidae 4
36 Paratrigona Meliponini Apinae Apidae 6
aaJI 7 Partamona Meliponini Apinae Apidaeal
lAndrenidae I 38 Meli A Apidae l3
39 Ptilotrigona Me A 1 lnae
40 Scaptotrigona Meliponini A 7
I lnae
Meliponini 41 Scaura Apinae Apidae 1
42 Tetragona Meliponini Apinae Apidae J
Meliponini Apidaelnae
plnaeA
A2
943
44 ,TrigonaTetragonisca
45 A dae 8 6CAI lnae
46 Ancyloscelis Ancyloscelidini Eucerinae dae 6
Eucerinae
50 ',Agapanthinus
iEucero
Eucerini Eucerinae
EuceriniEucerinae
Eucerini
Eucerini 96
a I20 Apidae'lothrixApidae
Emphorini Apidae
Ernphorini
Apidae
Eucerinae
ApidaeJ
2
27
I5
447
4948Diadasia 2
EucerinaeEucerinae
5l
5352
Eucerinae
EucerinaeEucerinae 54
55 EuceriniMartinapis
MelissodeslFlor1!9su1
'Gaesischia
Eucerini
56 Melissoptilo Eucerini Eucerinae 2
57 Eucerini Eucerinae Apidae J onla
Eucerinae
Eucerini Eucerinae SvastraI
/.) ApidaeSimanthedoz Eucerini 58
59
60 Thygater Eucerini Eucerinae Apidae 9 i
61Anthophorula Exomalopsini Eucerinae Apidae 59
62 Exomalopsis Exomalopsini Eucerinae Apidae 48
63Monoeca Tapinotaspidini Eucerinae Apidae 2
64 lParatetrapedia Tapinotaspidini Eucerinae Apidae 18
Aidae65
6866
67
,BrachynomadiniBrachynomadiniAmmobatini
Arnmobatoidini
NomadinaeNomadinae
NomadinaeNomadinae11
Jt9
7
ApidaeApidae
A
ParanomadaBrachynomadaites
Hol' rtes
69Triopasites Brachynomadini Nomadinae Apidae 2
70 Coelioxoides Coelioxoidini Nomadinae Apidae 1
Elnl 54 Epeolus peo
l,s lnl 5A
Apidae7l
72Nomadinae
Nomadinae
73 Thalestria Epeolini Nomadinae Apidae I
Epeoloidini Nomadinaelini dae
daeAr39
1 prNomadinae A 74 Triepeolus
75 )Epeoloides
76 t,Acanthopus Ericrocidini Nomadinae Apidae I
77 aomelissa Ericrocidini Nomadinae Apidae I
78 Ctenioschelus Ericrocidini Nomadinae dae 2a
aPlebeia
1
I
Melitoma v
v
v
v79 Ericrocis Ericrocidini Nomadinae Apidae 2
80Mesocheira Ericrocidini Nomadinae Apidae 1
8l Mesoplia Ericrocidini Nomadinae Apidae 8
82 Hexepeolus Hexepeolini Nomadinae Apidae 1
83Brachymelecta Melectini Nomadinae Apidae 6
84 Melecta Melectini Nomadinae Apidae 6
85 Zacosmia Melectini Nomadinae Apidae I
86 Biastes Neolarrini ,Nomadinae Apidae 5
87 Neolarca Neolarrini Nomadinae Apidae 16
88 emma Neolarrini Nomadinae dae 2
89 Townsendiella Neolarrini Nomadinae Apidae 4
90 Nomada Nomadini Nomadinae 294
91 Osiris Osirini Nomadinae 15
92 Protosiris Osirini Nomadinae Apidae
93 Leiopodus Protepeolini Nomadinae 2
94 Nanorhat Rhath Nomadinae Apidae 1 US
95 Rhathymus Rhathyrnini Nomadinae 2
96 Ceratina Ceratinini Xylocopinae Apidae 72
97 Tetrapedia Tetrapediini Xylocopinae Apidae 2
98Xylocopa Xylocopini Xylocopinae Apidae 37
99 Colletes Colletini Colletinae Colletidae 143
100 a Caupolicana lCaupolicanini Diphaglossinae Colletidae 6
101Crawfordapis Caupolicanini Diphaglossinae Colletidae 2
102Ptiloglossa Caupolicanini Diphaglossinae Colletidae 20
103 Mydrosoma rDissoglottini Diphaglossinae Colletidae ' 6
104 ',Hylaeus Hvlaeini Hylaeinae Colletidae ', 141
105Eulonchopria Eulonchopriini Neopasiphaeinae I Colletidae 2
106 iChilicola Xeromelissini Xeromelissinae ,Colletidae 6
107 Andinaugochlora Augochlorini Halictinae :HalictidaeI I
108 Augochlora Augochlorini ]Halictinae Halictidae 46
109 ugochlorella HalictinaeIHalictidae 8
ll0 Augochloropsis Augochlorini Halictinae Halictidae 18
111' Co"norgochlora,Augochlorini Halictinae Halictidae ''- Zt
112 Chlerogella Augochlorini Halictinae tHalictidae , 7
113 Megalopta Augochlorini lHalictinae Halictidae 5114 ',Megaloptilla :AugoChlorini Halictinae Halictidae 1115 ,Megaloptina iAugochlorini Halictinae Halictidae 2
116Neocorynura Augochlorini Halictinae Halictidae 20ll7 Pereirapis Augochlorini Halictinae Halictidae i
118 Pseudaugochlora A
I 1 Halictinae Halictidae 119 'tT"*roroma 1AugochloriniI
I
Halictidae 120 ,Agapostemon Caenohalictini Halictinae Halictidae 30
l2I Agapostemonoide:Caenohalictini Halictinae Halictidae I
1
7122
123Caenohalictus
temonCaenohalictini
CaenohalictiniHalictinae
HalictinaeHalictidae
Halictidae
124 tHabralictus Caenohalictini Halictinae Halictidae1J
125 Paragapostemon Caenohalictini Halictinae Halictidae I
I
13Halictinae 126
127Caenohalictini
Halictini HalictinaeRhinetula
HalictusHalictidae
Halictidae
128 Lasioglossum Halictini Halictinae Halictidae 389
Halictinae26
HalictidaeaJ
r33
136 ConanthalictusMexalictus
131
132
1311J
1
78
DufoureaHalictinaeHalictini
Sphecodini
Halictinae
Nomiinae Halictidae129
130Halictinae
HalictinaeHalictidae
Halictidae Microsphecodes
PtilocleptisNes
NontiaSphecodes
Dieunomia 134
135
RophitiniConanthalictiniNomiini9
7910
13Nomiinae
RophitinaeRophitinaeHalictidae
HalictidaeHalictidaeSphecodiniS
- IP!e!eqi!,
DieunomiiniHalictidae
Halictidae
Micralictoides Rophitinae Halictidae 8
Protodufourea Xeralictini Halictidae 5138
139
140 Xeralictini Sphecodosoma Halictidae 3 Rophitinae
t4t Xeralictini Rophitinae Halictidae 2 ictus
142 Lithurgopsis Li Lithurginae Megachilidae 8I
143L Lithurgini Lithurginae Me idae I
144 hidiellum Anthidiini
I Megachilidae 12
145 nthidiunt Anthidiini Meeachilinae ilidaeM 44
ll
?
J unl146
148147Anthodioctes
trostelisAnthidiini
AnthidiiniAnthidiinilinae
MegachilinaeMegachilidae
Megachilidae
M idae linae
149 tDianthidium Anthidiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 30
150Duckeanthidium AnthidiiniII Megachilinae Megachilidae
151 ,Epanthidium Anthidiini Megachilinae Megachilidae I
152Hoplosrelis Anthidiini Megachilinae 2 Megachilidae
153 :Hypanthidioides Anthidiini Megachilinae Megachilidae J
1s4 Hypanthidium Anthidiini 5IMegachilinae Megachilidae
155 tParanthidium Anthidiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 6I
156 :Pseudoanthidium Anthidiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 1 l
l
1 Me-eachilinae Megachilidae 151Rhynostelis Anthidiini
75 Megachilinae Megachilidae Anthidiini 158 ,Stelis
l
159 Trachusa Anthidiini 'Megachilinae Megachilidae 24
5 160 Dioxys Dioxyini Megachilinae Megachilidaet v
\,
v
\,
v
v
v161Coelioxys Megachilini Megachilinae Megachilidae 92
162 Megachile Megachilini Megachilinae Megachilidae ) 235
163 Ashmeadiella Osmiini Megachilinae Megachilidae i 60
164 Atoposmia Osmiini Megachilinae Megachilidae , 27
165Chelostoma Osmiini Megachilinae lMegachilidae 11
166 Heriades lOsmiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 13
167 Hoplftis Osmiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 57
168 Osmia Osmiini Megachilinae Megachilidae 148
169Protosmia Osrniini Megachilinae Megachilidae I
170 Xeroheriades Osrniini lMegachilinae Megachilidae I
\71
t72
t73Hesperapis Hesperapini lDasypodainae lMelittidaeI20
Macropis Macropidini Melittinae lMelittidae ) 4
Melitta Melittini Melittinae rMelittidae 4
4983
I
* number of species is based on Ascher and Pickering2022
I
updated: 7/7/22
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Subfamily totals:
Family Subfamily no. speciesI
Andrenidae Andreninae l 514,
Oxaeinae
I l1l
I
Panurginae 816
87
Apinae 348
Eucerinae 431
omadinae
Iae 111
Colletidae Colletinae
34t DiphaglossinaeI
I
l
l
I
j
Apidae Anthophorinae I
682
143
I Hylaeinae t4l
Neopasiphaeinae 2
Xeromelissinae
Halictidae Halictinae 690
Nomiinae r9
Rophitinae
Megachilidae Lithurginae 9
Megachilinae 869
Melittidae Dasypodainae 20
Melittinae 8
Total 5051l
I 6
I
110 \,
v
v
\,
\,
vChapter 4 - A primer on bee morphology
lupdated 6/28/20221
In order to use the keys in this book effectively, it is important to become familiar with
the morphology of bees and the terms used to describe morphological features. With that goal in
mind, we present below an overview of bee morphology and an introduction to the terms that are
used throughout the keys. We follow the terminology used in Michener (2007), which is based
on morphological studies of bees that date back to Michener's PhD thesis (Michener 1944).
Additional key papers on bee morphology include Urban (1967), Camargo et al. (1967),
Eickwort (1969), Stephen et al. (1969), and Brooks (1988). The illustrations in this chapter are
redrawn from Michener (1944 and 1965a) and Danforth (1996). For a detailed look at the
internal and external anatomy of the honeybee (Apis mellifera), see Snodgrass ( 1956). For a
comprehensive and modern overview of general insect morphology, see Beutel et al. (2014).
BODY REGIONS
Before diving into the details, let's consider a basic question. What do we call the three
body regions in bees? For most insects, the body is divided into three distinct regions: head,
thorax, and abdomen. The abdomen houses the reproductive, digestive, and excretory organs.
The thorax houses the leg and flight muscles, and the head bears the sensory organs and
mouthparts. However, in most Hymenoptera (bees included), the thorax and abdomen have been
reconfigured to such an extent that we cannot use these same terms. In Apocrita (: Hymenoptera
with a nalrow waist), the first abdominal segment has become attached to the posterior region of
the thorax and the narow "waist" is actually a constriction between abdominal segments 7 and2.
? 3
occipital sulcusma pn[n]
occllussupracil'pcal
facial (:veaocel lus liuc1'cl'tcx
supra-arnlennai area nrccrccjoi tul' ridgi'
para0cularsocketoccrpul
area pil
sti I urc
epistomal
suturc
p(lsloccipullrypostoma
clypeus area proboscidial fbssa
mandible lahrurn
Therefore, in Apocrita, we need to use slightly different terms. In Apocrita we refer to the
"mesosoma" (: thorax plus first abdominal segment, or "propodeum"; Fig. l3) and "metasoma"
(: remaining abdominal segments). Thus, in bees, we refer to the three body regions as head,
mesosoma, and metasoma. The head and mesosoma are complex structures and we will cover
those below. The metasoma, by contrast, is fairly simple consisting of dorsal sclerites (terga)
paired with ventral sclerites (sterna) to form a tube enclosing the intemal organs plus genitalia.
For use of the keys, it will be important to identiSz specific metasomal terga or stema. To do so,ut antennal we number terga and sterna of the metasoma starting with metasomal segment 1. Therefore, the
first metasoma tergum is T I , the second T2, and so forth. The same is true for sterna: the first
metasomal sternum is S1, the second 52, and so forth [Fig. 19]. Make sure that you are
comfortable with identiflring specific metasomal terga and stema when you start using the keys.
The sexes in bees are often quite different from one
another, and in parts of the keys the sexes are treated
separately. To people familiar with bees, males and females
can be distinguished most rapidly based on the overall shape
of the body - males are typically more slender than females
and they often have longer antennae. Also, the presence of a
distinct scopa will distinguish females from males in many
groups (excluding brood parasites, bees that carry pollen
internally, and queens of advanced eusocial species). Finally,
females have stings, and males have male genitalia [Fig. 20];
but both are commonly retracted, and in some fernales the
sting is rudimentary. Other features may need to be examined
to verify the sex of an individual, including the number of
antennal segments and the number of visible metasomal
segments. Males have l3 antennal segments (12 in Neopasites
and Holcopasites); females have 12 [Fig. 10]. In addition,
males and females typically differ in the number of visible
metasomal segments. In males, we can usually count seven
visible metasomal terga, whereas in females we can usually
count only six [Fig. 19]. But keep in mind that the last
segment, which often bears a pygidial plate, can be hidden. In
female Halictinae, for example, T6 is often hidden beneath
T5, so females appear to have just five visible terga. Likewise,
in some male bees it is difficult to see T7 because it is largely,
or rarely wholly, hidden beneath T6. In addition, in males of
some groups (e.9., Osrniini) the segments are greatly
telescoped and retracted so that the visible terga and sterna
can be reduced to as few as four visible stema and terga.cp.!sromaloeell
clypcus
iabrum
milndihle
cotrdylc
lorumrid8c
nd eyc
lo-slh olmrlur arca
ridpcacctsbular $uooec
prcnpical
loolh
lar ridge
groo!e
slilc\suturc
aref
accta blluur
6
lalpusmaxi,
gnlea
iabial
palpr sparaglossa
.glossa
HEAD CAPSULE (Figs 2-4, 10)
The malar area [Fig. 2] is the space between the eye and the mandible; its length is the
shortest distance from the eye to the mandible [Fig. 4);the width of this area is the width of the
base of the mandible. The foveae (singular: fovea) of the face [Fig. 2] and of the sides of the
second metasomal tergum (T2) are shallow depressions, usually black in color, with a texture
distinct from the surrounding cuticle, and variable in shape. The term orbit is often used for the
eye margin, inner orbit for the frontal or facial margin, and outer orbit for the genal margin. The
genal area is the region behind the eye and in front of the preoccipital ridge [Figs. 3 and 4]. The
ridge surrounding the concave posterior surface of the head above and laterally is called the
preoccipital ridge [Fig. 3]. A carina sometimes found on this rid-ee is the preoccipital carina. The v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
\,proboscidial fossa is the large, deep groove on the
underside of the head into which the proboscis
folds [Fig.3].
MOUTHPARTS (Figs. 5-9)
Bee mouthparts consist of paired mandibles
for chewing and a proboscis that can fold and
unfold for lapping and sucking nectar. For the
names of mandibular structures [Fig. 5], we usually
follow Michener and Fraser (1978). For simplicity
we often refer to preapical teeth on the upper8
lorum
basitibial
platslacini9
Ilagellum
lcrnu'cardo
galca
pediccl
clas'card<r
maxillarv
palpus
margin instead of teeth of the pollex. Other terms used herein are the condylar ridge, which
arises near the mandibular condyle and extends toward the apex of the mandible, and the outer
ridge, which is the next ridge above the condylar ridge on the outer surface of the mandible.
The bee proboscis is a complex stnrcture formed from a fusion of the maxilla and labium,
which together make up the "labiomaxillary complex." The maxilla consists of paired cardines
(singular: cardo) that suspend the labiomaxillary complex from beneath the head capsule, the
stipes, blade-like galea $lural: galeae), and the maxillary palpus (plural: palpi) with up to six
segments [Figs. 6,7). Attached at the apex of the
cardines is the labium, which consists of the lorum,
mentum, prementum, tongue-like glossa, and (typically)
four-segmented labial palpus [Fig. 6]. In Colletidae the
glossa is quite different from that of other bees [Fig. 8,
9]. Rather than being slender and elongate, as in most
other bee families, the colletid glossa is short and
bilobed (sometimes referred to as "bifid"). This
modification of the glossa is related to the application of
the thick, cellophane brood cell lining that characterizes
colletid bees (Batra 1980).
Bees can be divided into two broad categories
based on mouthpart morphology: short-tongued bees
(Andrenidae, Hal i cti dae, C oll etidae, Stenotritidae, and
Melittidae), in which the labial palpal segments are all
similar in morphology (Fig. 8), and long-tongued bees
(Apidae and Megachilidae), in which the first two labial
palpal segments are slender and blade-like (Fig. 6).
Danforth et al. (2019) provide a more detailed
description of the proboscis and how it functions.
The proboscis is typically folded beneath the
head capsule, making it very difficult to distinguish
among the complex and interconnected elements.
However, if the mouthparts are pulled before pinning, while the specimen is still flexible, the
individual elements can be easily recognized. In some cases? it is necessary to examine the
maxillary and labial palpi and to count the number of palpal segments (e.g., in certain Eucerini).
It can also be useful to be able to identifiz the blade-like, first two labial palpal segments in long-labial palpus
paragl
ll
tibial spitr.
basitaisus
mcdiotrrsusspur
1)coxA
distilarsuq10 ?cotr ar\ tf'Crl..
\otl cto,-lU
tongued bees as a tool for knowing whether you are examining a short-tongued or long-tongued
bee. But this is by no means essential for using the keys to the genera. Chapter l1 (Key to the
Farnilies of North and Central America), however, makes heavy use of mouthpart characters
because these characters are defining features of the bee families.
MESOSOMA (Figs. 11-18)
The mesosoma is a compact structure consisting of sclerites of the pro-, meso- and
metathoracic segments, which bear the legs and wings, and the first true abdominal segment,
termed the propodeum [Figs. 13 and 14]. The prothorax in bees is represented primarily by the
large pronotum, which extends laterally and meets ventrally behind the forecoxae, forming a
tubelike structure. The pronotal lobe is a useful landmark, and its shape and location may be used
in generic identification. The mesothorax and metathorax bear the wings and the second and
third pairs of legs. In dorsal view [Fig. 14], the mesothorax can be divided into four distinct
sclerites: the scutum, the scutellum, and paired axillae. Dorsally, the metathorax consists of a
single sclerite, the metanotum. Laterally [Fig. 13], the mesothorax is represented by the
mesepisternum, sometimes referred to as the mesopleuron. The mesepisternum is sometimes
divided by the pre-episternal groove into the pre-episternum (or pre-episternal area) and the rest
of the mesepistemum. The shape and location of the pre-epistemal groove, the scrobal groove,
and the scrobe are often important in generic identification. The metepisternum (or metapleuron)
forms the lateral surface of the metathorax. The wing bases are located above the upper margins
of the mesepisternum and the metepisternum.
Y
vi3 14
sculellun:pronotrml
parapsid:rl l.ineaxil I a
metal'r0tum scutun]notaulus
lbrerring hasehasaiparapsidal line
pronoral lobe
lbruwingpruroturl proprulcal spiracle
pre-episternum
prc-cpr
Rroo\re proprodeun:
prc-upistcmurr melepislernum
hind u'ing base
propodcal spiarilla
coxa l
scrobc
coxa 2coxa 3propodeumscutellum
scrohal groovcprnpodeal pit
The form and subdivisions of the propodeum are not easy to illustrate but are exceedingly
important for identification. Many bees have a pair of impressed lines on the propodeum,
beginning near the anterior dorsolateral parts of the propodeum and extending downward and
posteromesially and nearly rneeting in the propodeal pit [Fig. 149], a median depression of the
lower posterior surface. These lines, together with the anterior dorsal margin of the propodeum,
enclose the triangular area, or propodeal triangle [Fig. 1a9]. Morphologically, this triangle is the
metapostnotum (Brothers 1976). The shape of the propodeum as seen in profile is quite
independent of the triangle. The whole propodeum may be vertical or nearly so, dropping from
the posterior margin of the metanotum. In this case it is termed declivous. However, as in Fig.
13, there may be a more or less horizontal basal region. In Fig. 1 3 it is separated by a sharp line, \,
V
v
v
\,
v
\,
\,
vor carina, from the declivous posterior surface. When such is the case, the horizontal part is
called the basal zone, or basal area, ofthe propodeum [Fig. 1 3]. It is part ofthe propodeal
triangle. The term "basal area" is applicable even if no
sharp line separates the horizontal from the vertical
surfaces. In some bees the two surfaces are continuously
rounded, one onto the other in a broad curving surface; in
that case the term "basal area" is not definable unless there
is distinctive surface sculpturing.
Wings are illustrated, and the veins labeled, in
Figs. 15 and 16, using a modified Comstock and Needham
system. Because the homologies of the veins are not very
certain, as well as because some comparable-looking veins
have very different morphological names, it has seemed
best to continue the use of some terms that are
morphologically noncommittal for certain cells and veins
heavily used in taxonomy. The names of cells and certain
noncommittal names for veins are shown in Figs. 17 and
18.
Of special importance are three veins that all look
like crossveins: the second abscissa of Rs (or first
transverse cubital), first r-m (or second transverse cubital),
and second r-m (or third transverse cubital), to use the
Comstock and Needham system. These veins help to
define the submarginal cells, which are usually either
three or two in number. It is important to note that
submarginal cells can be variable within species. While
the vast majority of individuals within a species exhibitRS2ud ab*issa
ol Rsl5
M-Cu
l6I{s U
cu-\
lr{+C'u
R
:nd submreual
lrdsubmargirai
marginal cc111'l
baxl
radial
lsr cuhiul ccll
2nd rubiul
ndial ccll
cubital ccll
jugal lahrlst
lsl
the "typical" wing venation pattem for that species, there 18lst ccl ltrccurcntLrcaurcnt*rd
lnd mcdial cell I
hanruli
are developmental anomalies that can result in non-
typical pattems of wing venation. Scarpulla (2018)
identified a number of such wing vein anomalies in
species of Colletidae, Andrenidae, Halictidae and
Apidae. These wing vein anomalies are commonly
expressed as a loss ofthe second transverse cubital vein
in which a bee species that typically has three
submarginal cells instead has two. In some cases individuals can have normal wing venation on
one side of the body and non-typical wing venation on the other. If you suspect you have a
specimen with such a wing vein anomaly, the best solution is to compare it to other individuals
of the same species to verifu what is the "normal" pattem.
Wings are described as though spread, so that the direction toward the costal margin
(where the stigma is in the forewing) is called anterior; toward the wing apex, distal. To save
space, the word stigma is used in place of pterostigma [Fig. 15].
The jugal and vannal lobes of the hind wing are both measured from the wing base to the
apices of the lobes. Thus, on Fig. 18 one might say that the jugal lobe is about two-thirds as long
as the vannal.vannal lobelnr-cu
i
LUI Some authorities advocate a system for identifoing parts of legs that assumes that all legs
are pulled out laterally at right angles to the long axis of the body. Although we appreciate the
logic of that system, we follow the more traditional system in which the legs are considered to be
in their normal positions. Thus, we consider the corbicula of Apidae [Fig. 22]to be on the outer,
not the anterior, surface of the hind tibia, and we consider the two hind tibial spurs to be outer
and inner, not anterior and posterior.
The tibial spurs are the movable inferior apical spurs on the tibiae; the tibial spines are
immovable, sharp, superior, apical projections, usually srnall in size, found in some bees (see
Fig. I 1 and Michener 1944). Description of the tibial spurs is important in many bees; this is
especially so of the inner hind tibial spur. This spur usually has two toothed margins. It is the
inner one that is commonly elaborated in various ways. It may be finely or coarsely serrate.
Following custom, we have described this margin as ciliate if it has slender, almost hairlike
projections (usually numerous), although in many cases the appearance is like that of a fine
comb. Also following custom, we have described a spur as pectinate if its inner margin is
produced into a few long, coarse, often blunt projections [Fig. 154], even though the number of
such projections is in some cases reduced to only two or three.
The basitibial plate is a plate on the outer side of the
base of the hind tibia of many bees fFigs. 11, 174, and 175],
presumably important for support as bees move up or down
their burrows in the soil. Commonly it is surrounded by a
carina or a sharp line of some sort and has vestiture (if any)
different from that of adjacent regions, but it may be
indicated only by a series of tubercles, or even by a single
tubercle, and in some cases (as in Xylocopa) its apex is
represented by a structure near the middle of the tibia.
On the inner surface of the hind tibia of most bees is
an area of variable size covered with hairs of uniform length,
usually blunt or briefly bifid. These are called keirotrichia.
Between the tarsal claws there is often a protruding,
pad-like arolium (plural: arolia) [Fig. 12]. The arolium can
be lacking in some taxa, such as Megachile, Ptilothrix,
Euglossini, and Centridini.
The scopa (plural: scopae) is the pollen-carrying
brush of hairs. If such hairs surround a space in which pollen
is carried, they are said to form a corbicula. The best known
corbicula is on the outer side of the hind tibia of Apidae, butt9
prcpygidiatgtaduli
V
VT6
('{'{!'
pygidial limbria
pygidial plate
other corbiculae are on the underside of the hind femur of Andrenidae, Halictidae, Colletidae,
and others and on the side of the propodeum of many species of Andrena. In most bees the scopa
is on the hind legs, but in Megachilidae and some others it is on the underside of the metasoma.
Scopae are, of course, found only on nonparasitic females; in the keys, we do not state this fact
in every case. Scopae are absent in parasitic bees, in all male bees, in queens of highly social
bees, and in Hylaeus. v
\,
v
v
\,METASOMA (Figs. t9-22)
Each metasomal tergum or stemum (except for the anteriormost and the reduced apical
ones) consists of a plate commonly marked by some transverse lines, as follows: (1) Across the
anterior margin, always completely hidden in the intact metasoma, is the antecosta. (2) Basal to
the middle of each plate is anothertransverse line, the gradulus (plural: graduli; Fig. l9). The
ends of the tergal graduli, unless bent strongly to the rear, are usually near the spiracles. If bent
strongly to the rear, the resultant longitudinal lines are called lateral parts or lateral arms of the
graduli or, if carinate, lateral gradular carinae. The area anterior to the gradulus is usually at a
slightly higher level than that posterior to it, so that the gradulus is like a minute step. The
elevated, pre-gradular area provides a smooth surface for the anterior tergum or sternum to move
across as the metasoma moves and changes shape. The graduli are often concealed on the intact
metasoma but, especially on the second tergum and sternum, are sometimes exposed. (3) Near
the posterior margin of each tergum and stemum is usually another transverse line, the
premarginal line, separating the posterior marginal area from the rest of the sclerite. This area is
often depressed but in other cases differs only in sculpturing from the area basal to it.
The pygidial plate [Fig. l9] is a usually flat plate, commonly surrounded by a carina or a
line and in some cases produced as an apical projection, on T6 of females or T7 of males. The
prepygidial fimbria is a dense band of hairs across the apex of T5 of females. It is conspicuously
different from, usually denser than, the apical hair bands or fasciae of preceding terga. Dense
hairs on T6 of females, on each side of the pygidial plate, constitute the pygidial fimbria [Fig.
1el.
:1
20
gonostylus
penis
penis valve
gonocoxite
volsella
apodemc of
penis valve2L
gr:nobase
The genital capsule [Fig. 20] as well as 57 and S8
[Figs. 21,22) of male bees exhibit many diagnostic characters
and may be dissected out for study (in fact, for some groups,
species-level identifications may require examination of male
57, 58 or the genital capsule). In some groups the sixth, fifth,
and even the fourth stema are also hidden and modified. On a
freshly relaxed specimen it is usually possible to reach between the apical exposed tergum and
sternum and, with a hooked needle, pull out the genitalia and hidden stema. In most cases such dissection is not difficult, but in the Megachilidae the numerous hidden stema are firmly
connected to one another and to the terga laterally and are often delicate medially, so that
successful dissection may be difficult. Beginners should start with other groups.
For gross observations, sterna and genitalia may be preserved dry, glued to a card on the
pin with the specimen. For more detailed study, they should be immersed in a solution of l}Yo
sodium or potassium hydroxide to remove the muscle tissue, then washed in water, and placed
for study in glycerin, and transferred for preservation to microvials, kept with the specimen by
running the pin through the stopper. Preservation on slides has the disadvantage of making side
views impossible, as well as crushing the genitalia, which are often quite thick. \,
\,
v
v
vChapter 5 - Locators for the Key to the Genera
lupdated 6/24/20221
For people new to bee identification, Chapter 6 (Key to the Genera) may appear forbiddingly
long. We therefore provide eight locators to help bypass portions of the main key and thus
facilitate identifications. Not all bees agree with any of the initial locator statements; those that
do not should be run from the beginning of Chapter 6 (Key to the Genera).
Each numbered locator begins with a statement. A bee agreeing with that statement can be run
through the locator key (with lettered couplets) following that statement. The locator key leads to
numbered couplets of the main key or to particular genera. Thus, specimens that agree with the(A, [grnalcJ 'n3) |
initial statement of any of the locators can be identified relatively quickly
only for females. Locators 6-8 work for both sexes.. Locators 1-5 function
The following is a list of the locators:
l. Outer surface of female hind tibia with a usually flat or concave, shining, and largely hairless
area surrounded by fringes to form a corbicula [F|g.22].
2. Ventral surface of female metasoma with scopa of pollen-carrying hairs [Fig. 23]; hind leg
without scopa; two submarginal cells [Fig. 25].
3. Scopa of pollen-carrying hairs extensively developed on hind femur [Fig. 26], frequently on
tibia as well (commonly also on trochanter), and forming a corbicula on underside of
femur.
4. Scopa of pollen-carrying hairs well developed on hind tibia (but not forming a corbicula),
reduced or absent on hind femur and trochanter fFig.271.
5. Scopa absent in females (on both hind legs and metasomal sterna) [mostly brood parasitic
beesl.
6. Basal vein of forewing strongly arcuate or subangulate near base [Fig. 28]; T5 of females
(except in parasitic genera) with longitudinal median zone or triangular area of short,
dense hairs, or minute, dense punctation (and sometimes with a slit) dividing the
prepygidial fimbria lFig.29); T6 of females ordinarily completely hidden by T5.
7. Arolia absent [compare Figs. 30 and 31].
8. Males with elongate antennae (Fig. ##); females with a W-shaped gradulus on 52 (Fig. ##);
large, relatively robust, hairy bees (Eucerini) LOCATOR 1
Outer surface of female hind tibia with a usually flot or
concave, shining, and largely hairless area suruounded
by fringes to form a corbicula lFig.22l (most female
corbiculate Apidae) .....................a
a. Hind tibial spurs absent [Fig. 5a].... ..........b
- Hind tibial spurs present and conspicuous [Fig. 55].. c11
Ycorbicula
b(a). Eyes hairy; venation strong [as in Fig. 35] (Apidae,
Apinae)..... ..Apis ll5l)
- Eyes bare; transverse cubital veins, second recurrent
vein and apex of marginal cell weak or absent [Figs.
32-34) (Apidae, Meliponini) (tropical)...go to Chapter 7,
Key to the Genera of Meliponini
c(a). Proboscis in repose not reaching metasoma; body nonmetallic; comb of bristles on base of
hind wing absent (Apidae, Bombinae) Bombus ll52)
- Proboscis in repose reaching beyond base of meta-soma; body usually at least partly metallic;
comb of bristles in position ofjugal lobe of hind wing present [Fig. 65] (Apidae, Euglossinae)
(tropical)........... ............go to couplet l2
LocAroR2 ( rt*^lz u^t, ]J
metasomalVentral surface offemale metasoma with scopa of
pollen-carrying hairs [Fig. 23],' hind leg without
scopa; two submarginal cells lFig.25] (most female
Megachilidae) .,4
a. Mandible tridentate, middle tooth longer than others lFig.3aT; outer surfaces of tibiae with
numerous coarse spicules not ending in hairs or bristles [Fi-q. 3a8] (Megachilidae, Lithurginae).... v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
v
vb(a). Thorax andlor metasoma with yellow, white, or red integumental markings or rarely body
largely red; metasomal terga ordinarily without apical bands of pale hair ...go to Chapter 10, Key
to the Genera of Anthidiini
- Thorax and metasoma without integumental markings, black or metallic; metasoma above
sometimes largely red; metasomal terga often with apical bands of pale hair...........
go to couplet 1 l5
3sm2snr
2srnism
I snr
2524
LOCATOR 3
Scopa of pollen-carrying hairs extensively developed on hindfemur
[Fig. 26] (frequently also on tibia and trochanter) and forming a26
corbicula on underside offemur (females)
a. With three submarginal cells [Fig. 24]
- With two submarginal cells fas in Fig. 25] .
b(a). First recurrent vein meetingfirst transverse cubital I or
within one or two vein widths of it [Fig. 56]; stigma no wider than
prestigma measured to wing margin [Fig. 56] (Colletidae,
Diphaglossinae, part) go to couplet 5
- First recurrent vein far beyond first transverse cubital, often
near or beyond second transverse cubital [Fig. 57]; stigma often
wider than prestigma [Fig. 57] (If first recurrent vein near first
transverse cubital, as in some Mydrosoma,wing length under 12 mm.)..a
b
h
sc0pa
c.go to couplet 105
- Mandible bidentate to multidentate with apical (lower) tooth longest [Figs. 371 and 372);
outer surfaces of tibiae without coarse spicules or, if spiculate, usually with hair arising from
apex of each (Megachilidae, Megachilinae) ........... ..................b c(b). Second recurrent vein distinctly arcuate outward in its posterior portion [Fig. 79]
(Colletidae, Colletinae, part) Colletes |l
- Posterior portion of second recurrent vein not arcuate outward [Fig. 80] ,d
d(c). Marginal cell rounded at apex, which is on or almost on wing margin [Fig. 8a]; first and
third submarginal cells subequal in length of posterior margins, ordinarily much longer than
second, which is quadrate [Fig. 8a];jugal lobe of hind wing much over three-fourths as long as
vannal lobe [Fig. I 15] (Halictidae, Nomiinae) .go to couplet 25
- Marginal cell with apex pointed [Fig. 83], minutely truncate [Fig. 86], or bent well away from
wing margin [Fig. 89]; submarginal cells not as above;jugal lobe of hind wing three-fourths as
long as vannal lobe or usually much less [Fig. 114]........... .......e
e(d). Body extraordinarily coarsely punctate; certain metasomal terga with yellow to white
integumental bands; preoccipital ridge formed as strong lamella (Colletidae, Colletinae, part)
(tropical to Arizona)............... .......Eulonchopria 12)
- Body not especially coarsely punctate; metasoma without integumental bands; preoccipital
ridge not lamellate..... f
f(e). Third submarginal cell shorter than second [Fig. 35] (Colletidae, Diphaglossinae, part) (rare,
tropical) Mydrosoma (part) 16l
- Third submarginal cell as long as or longer than second [as in Fig. 24) ..-.....-...........................g
g(f). Stigma absent or nearly so [Fig. 192] (Oxaeinae) .go to couplet 40
- Stigma present, rather large [Figs. 118 and 119] (The few parasitic genera in this part of the
key lack a well-developed scopa, and Melitta lacks a strong femoral scopa.)
go to couplet 26
h(a). Basal vein strongly arcuate near base fas in Fig. 101] (Subgroups, sometimes recognized as
genera, are characterized in "Notes.") (Halictidae, Halictinae, Halictini) .. ....... . .
......... Las ioglos sum (pam) [a0]
- Basal vein gently and rather uniformly arcuate or straight [as in Fig. 100] ... ... I
i(h). Antennal bases near middle of face [Fig. 3a3]; clypeus with upper margin arched up into
::: :: :T: t: : ::: :l:i ::: ::T:::::: T: ii:l ":::*: 11ll:l1ll ;,,i,".. a^i; i,,i
- Antennal bases well below middle of face [Fig. 33 I ]; clypeus short, transverse, its upper
margin not much arched up into face [Fig. 331] (Halictidae, Rophitinae) ........... ..
..go to couplet 97 v
\,
\,
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
vLOCATOR 4
Scopa of pollen-carrying hairs well-developed on hind tibia
(but notforming a corbicula), reduced or absent on hindfemur
and trochanter lFig.27l (females) (The halictid subfamily
Rophitinae is included in this locator as well as in locator 3
because the femoral scopa is sometimes rather weak and27
smaller than the tibial scopa.)
a. With three submarginal cells [as in Fig. 241.....
- With two submarginal cells [as in Fig. 25]
b(a). Marginal cell slender, seven times as long as broad and
only a little over half as wide as widest submarginal cell [Fig.
1911; stigma absent [Fig. 191] (large, robust bees [Fig. 505])
(Apidae, Xylocopinae, Xylocopini) ............ ........ Xylocopa l1 501
- Marginal cell six times as long as broad or less, much more
than half as wide as widest submarginal cell [Fig. 209]; stigma usually distinct............................c
c(b). Outer hind tibial spur absent, inner spur and middle tibial spur coarsely pectinate [Fig. 206]
(arolia absent) (Apidae, Xylocopinae, Tetrapediini) (tropical) .............
Tetrapedia ll33)
- Hind tibia with the usual two spurs; tibial spurs simple, i.e., only minutely serrate or ciliate
along margins [Fig. 108] ........................d
d(c). Pygidial plate absent [Fig. 102]; slender, shiny bees with hairs sparse, not forming
metasomal bands [Figs. 503 and 50a] (Apidae, Xylocopinae, Ceratinini)
Ceratina 1149)
- Pygidial plate present [Fig. 103]; slender to robust, usually hairy, often with metasomal hair
bands.
e(d). Apex of marginal cell pointed on or very near wing margin [as in Figs. I 18 and I l9]
(Halictidae, Rophitinae, part)...... ...... go to couplet 26, stop with couplet 30
- Apex of marginal cell strongly truncate, or rounded or pointed and bent well away from wing
margin [Figs. 87-90]
f(e). Arolia absent [Fig. 20a]
- Arolia present [Fig. 205].,:t.
\ a
b
scopa
f
go to couplet 52,| g(l). Posterior margin of first submarginal cell at least 1.3 times as long as third [Fig. 237]; body
elongate (like Andrena [Figs. 421-424] or Halictus [Figs. 439 and aa}D; proboscis short,
segments of labial palpus similar [as in Fig. 8] or only first elongate (Andrenidae, Panurginae,
part) ........ Protandrena llSl
- Posterior margin of first submarginal cell little if any longer than third [Fig. 238]
(intermediate in Ancyloscelis, Exomalopsis, and others, which have unusually short, robust
bodies [Figs. a8a-a861; body commonly robust lFig. a73); proboscis long, first two segments of
labial palpus elongate, flattened, entirely different from segments 3 and 4 [Fig. 6] (Apidae,
Anthophorinae, part) ............h
h(g). Closed cells of forewing largely hairless [as in Fig. 228);wing surface beyond veins
coarsely papillate and hairless .. go to couplet 65
- Entire forewing with nurnerous minute hairs [Fig. 229); wing surface beyond veins not
papillate or if so, many papillae ending in hairs ...............go to couplet 73
i(a). Marginal cell beyond stigma on costa liule if any longer than stigma and second
submarginal cell less than two-thirds as long as first [Fig. 306] (see footnote to couplet 173)
(Andrenidae, Panurginae, part) .... ........... P erdita (part) llTl
- Marginal cell beyond stigma on costa longer than stigma or, if not, then second submarginal
cell two-thirds as long as first or longer lFig. 32al (see footnote to couplet 173)........... ... ........... j
j(i). Apex of marginal cell pointed on costa or separated from costa by only one or two vein
widths fFigs. 83-86]; stigma large (see couplet l5 for details)........... k
v
v- Apex of marginal cell rounded, truncate, or pointed and separated from costa by distance
equal to several vein widths fas in Figs. 87-90]; stigma usually small (see couplet l5 for details)..
k(i). Antennal bases well below middle of face and separated from clypeus by little if any more
than diameter of antennal socket fFigs. 109 and 110]; clypeus short, transverse, its upper margin
not much arched up into face; pre-epistemal groove present [Fig. 59] (Halictidae, Rophitinae,part).'....'... ....go to couplet 97
- Antennal bases near middle of face [Fig. I I 1 ] or, if below, separated from clypeus by much
more than diameter of antennal socket; clypeus strongly arched up into face, so that it is not short
::: 1T:::ll lfli l l ll: :::-'*::::l :'""* ::'* j'llliT llil : *; ;; ;;i;, i0;
1(i). Jugal lobe of hind wing less, usually much less, than two-thirds as long as vannal lobe [Fig.
349]; first two segments of labial palpus long, sheathlike, unlike segments 3 and 4 fas in Fig. 6]
(Apidae, Eucerini, Exomalopsini, part) ...............Anthophorula (part) ll20l,| v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
v- Jugal lobe of hind wing at least nearly three-fourths as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 350]; first
two segments of labial palpus not long and sheathlike, either all four segments similar or only
first segment elongate fas in Fig. 8] (Andrenidae, Panurginae) ..........go to couplet 124
LOCATOR 5
Scopa absent (on both hind legs and metasomal sterna) (females)
a. Hind tibial spurs absent fas in Fig. 54]; venation reduced [as in Figs. 32 and 33; see couplet 1
of "Key to the Genera"] (Apidae, Meliponinae, part) (tropical)... .... Lestrimelitta 11601
- Hind tibial spurs present fas in Fig. 55]; venation not reduced [as in Fig. 35; see couplet 1 of
"Key to the Genera"]............... ...............ba
b(a). Three submarginal cells [as in Fig. 241.-..........
- Two submarginal cells (rarely only one) [as in Fig. 25] ...
15 for details)c
J
c(b). Large [Figs. 510-515]; brilliantly metallic green, blue, or purple; with proboscis in repose
extending beyond base of metasoma; comb of bristles in position ofjugal lobe of hind wing [Fig.
651 (Apidae, Euglossinae, part) (tropical)... ....go to couplet 11
....d
d(c). Jugal lobe of hind wing absent; large, Bombus-like bees [Figs. 508 and 509] (Apidae,
Bombini, part).......... Bombus (subgenus Psithyrus) ll53l
- Jugal lobe of hind wing present [Figs. 91 and 92]; usually smaller, not Bombus-like..
e(d). Marginal cell pointed on costal margin of wing or nearly so [Figs. 83 and 86] (see couplet
f
- Marginal cell with apex rounded, truncate, or, if pointed, with apex bent well away from costa
[Figs. 87-90] (see couplet 15 for details) .................g
f(e). Basal vein arcuate or subangulate near base [Fig. 119] (Halictidae, Halictinae, part)...
go to Chapter 8, Key to the Genera of Halictinae
- Basal vein straight or gently curved [as in Fig. 1 18] .....go to couplet 17
g(e). Middle tibial spur notched, bifid, or multidentate at apex [Figs. 194 and 195] (Apidae,
Nomadinae, Ericrocidini)................... .............go to couplet 43- Usually smaller; usually not brilliantly metallic; proboscis in repose not reaching metasoma;
jugal lobe of hind wing usually present [Figs. 91 and 92f,never replaced by comb of bristles........ - Middle tibial spur ending in a simple, sharp point [Fig. 196] .h
v
Y
vh(g). Arolia absent [as in Fig. 2041; marginal cell less than twice as long as stigma and not
exceeding third submarginal cell [Fig. 208] (Apidae, Nomadinae, Melectini, part)
Zacosmia 1126f
- Arolia present fas in Fig. 205]; marginal cell longer, extending beyond third submarginal cell
[Fig.21e]............. ................. i
i(h). Pygidial plate distinct [as in Fig. 2351..........
- Pygidial plate unrecognizable (Apidae, Nomadinae, Protepeolini) (rare, SW).go to couplet 55
Leiopodus ll30)
j(b). Marginal cell beyond stigma little if any longer than stigma and second submarginal cell
less than two-thirds as long as first [as in Fig. 306] (sometimes second submarginal cell absent)
(Apidae, Nomadinae, Neolarrini) ............... ........ Neolarra ll42)
- Marginal cell beyond stigma longer than stigma or, if not, second submarginal cell two-thirds
as long as first or longer [as in Fig. 307] ......... .......k
k(i). Second submarginal cell little, if any, more than half as long as first or rarely three-fifths as
long [Fig. 310]; first recurrent vein received by first submarginal cell or meeting first transverse
cubital [Fig. 310], rarely beyond it .... .............go to couplet 85
- Second submarginal cell at least two-thirds as long as first and receiving first recurrent vein
[Fig. 311]............. .................1
1(k). Axilla produced posteriorly to a lobe, angle, or blunt spine lateral to scutellum [Fig. 319]
.........9o to couplet 90
- Axilla not produced, or produced as a rounded lobe........
m
m(l). Basal vein strongly arcuate near base fas in Fig. 323] (Halictidae, Halictinae, Halictini,part).......... Sphecodes (part) [47]
- Basal vein gently and rather uniformly arcuate or straight fFig.32a)
n(m). Marginal cell not or scarcely exceeding submarginal cells [as in Fig. 351] (Apidae,
Nomadinae, Melectini)....... ........ ....Brachymelecta (part) [123]
- Marginal cell extending beyond submarginal cells [Figs. 352 and 353] .. .....o
o(n). Apex of marginal cell obliquely truncate, i.e., bent sharply away from wing margin fas in
Fig. 3521 (Apidae, Nomadinae, Ammobatini)............ -.....Oreopasites ll34l,n v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,- Apex of marginal cell on wing margin or gradually bent from wing margin, pointed or
narrowly rounded [as in Fig. 353]........ p
p(o). Labrum much broader than long [Fig. 356] (Apidae, Nomadinae)
- Labrum longer than broad [Fig. 357] (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Anthidiini)..go to Chapter
10, Key to the Genera of Anthidiini
q(p). Apex of marginal cell pointed on or almost on wing margin [as in Figs. 83 and 86] .........
................9o to couplet 100
- Apex of marginal cell somewhat rounded, separated from wing margin [Fig. 90]
...............9o to couplet 111q
LOCATOR 6
Basal vein offorewing strongly arcuate or
subangulate near base [Fig. 28]; T5 of
females (except in parasitic genera) with
longitudinal median zone or triangular area
of short, dense hairs, or minute, dense
punctation (and sometimes with a slit)
dividing the prepygidial fimbria lFig.29l; T6
offemales ordinarily completely hidden by
15 (Halictidae, Halictinae) ........................... abasal vcin
to
T]29
't4
a. Three submarginal cells [as in Fig. 52].........go to Chapter 8, Key to the Genera of Halictinae
- Two submarginal cells [as in Fig. 53] .go to couplet 94 LOCATOR 7
Arolia absent [cornpare Figs. 30 and 31] a
a. Three submarginal cells [Fig. 52]
- Two submarginal cells [Fig. 53] (Megachilidae,
part) d
b(a). Jugal lobe of hind wing absent, sometimes
replaced by bristles [Fig. 65] (Apidae, Bombini and
Euglossini) ........9o to couplet 9b
30 3l
h
arolium
- Jugal lobe of hind wing present fas in Figs. 66 and
911 ........... .............c
c(b). Middle tibial spur notched, bifid, or multidentate at apex [Figs. 194 and 195] (Apidae,
Nomadinae, Ericrocidini) (arolia present in Ctenioschelus)..
.go to couplet 43
- Middle tibial spur ending in a simple, sharp point [Fig. 196) ...
d(a). Eyes hairy [Fig. 321] (Megachilinae, Megachilini).
- Eyes bare.............Coelioxlts [76]
e(d). Mandible tridentate, middle tooth longer and more elevated than others [Fig. 347]; outer
surfaces of tibiae with numerous coarse spicules not bearing
hairs or bristles [Fig. 3a8] (Lithurginae)............... .............9o to couplet 105
- Mandible simple or with lower tooth longest fFigs. 371 and 372], number of teeth variable;
outer surfaces of tibiae not spiculate or, if so, with bristle arising from apex of each(Megachilinae).......... ........... f
f(e). Thorax and/or metasoma with yellow or white (rarely red) integumental markings or rarely
entire body red with black or yellowish markings (Anthidiini)..........go to Chapter 10, Key to the
Genera of Anthidiini
- Thorax and metasoma without integumental markings, black or metallic or metasoma alone
red (rarely terga with nalrow apical cream-colored margins) .............. h
g(c). Marginal cell slender, seven times as long as broad and only a little over half as wide as
widest submarginal cell [Fig. 192]; stigma absent [Fig. 192] (large, robust bees) (Oxaeinae)
.........go to couplet 40 v
v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
v- Marginal cell six times as long as broad or less, much more than half as wide as widest
submarginal cell [Fig. 209]; stigma usually distinct [Fig. 209] (Apidae, Anthophorinae, part) ...go
to couplet 50
h(f). Margin of stigrna in first submarginal cell shorter than or about as long as width of stigma
[Fig. 390]; claws of female cleft or with inner preapical tooth [as in Figs. 367 and 368]; clypeus
and paraocular area of male usually yellow or cream-colored (Subgroups, sometimes recognized
as genera, are characterized in "Notes.") (Anthidiini)............... .....Trachusa (parl lal
- Margin of stigma in first submarginal cell longer than width of stigma [Fig. 391]; claws of
female simple or with basal tooth; clypeus and paraocular areas not yellow or cream-colored
(Subgroups, sometimes recognized as genera, are characterized in "Notes.") (Megachilini)
............ Megachile l7 7)
LOCATOR 8
Males with elongate antennae fFig. ##l;females with a l4/-
shaped gradulus on 52 [Figs. 253-254]; large, relatively
robust, hairy bees: go to Chapter 9, Key to the Genera of
Eucerini253
254S1
SIgradulus
graduius Chapter 6 -Key to the Genera (main key) - START HERE
lupdated 7/8/2022)
1. Transverse cubital veins and second recurrent vein weak compared with other veins, commonly
absent fFigs. 32-34); marginal cell open [Fig. 32] or closed by weakened vein [Fig. 33]; hind tibial
spurs absent [Fig. 5a] ...... Go to Chapter 7,Key to Genera of Meliponini
- Veins well developed, conspicuous; marginal cell closed by strong vein [Fig. 35]; hind tibial*::::::llllli lil'7:*::::::llit: illTy:.: i'::::::::::'::::?:::::::'!:: ;
ccll
stigma
1?
ccll
34 3stransyerse
N{cubitals
I st N,lrecurTenl
lnd Cucell
v33
cell
veln
vernsrecurTent
2(1). With three submarginal cells [Fig. 52]; rarely second transverse cubital incomplete, so that
second and third submarginal cells are partly united
- With two submarginal cells [Fig. 53], rarely only one.. .....80recurrent veintransversc
cubitals
lsl Mcubital
veln
2nd Cu v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
\,
\,
\,Jsm2sm
52
spurs absentspurs
Presentl
53
3(2). Hind tibial spurs absent [Fig. 5a]; eyes hairy [as in Fig. 321] (Apidae, Apinae).
.Apis ltsrl
- Hind tibial spurs present [Fig. 55] except in males of Eulonchopria and Coelioxoides, which
have bare eyes 4
4(3). First recurrent vein meetingfirsttransverse cubital [Fig. 56] or within one or two vein widths
of it; stigma no wider than prestigma measured to wing margin [Fig. 56] (Colletidae,
Diphaglossinae, part) ..........5
- First recurrent vein far beyond first transverse cubital [Fig. 57], often near or distal to second
transverse cubital; stigma often wider than prestigma [Fig. 57] but highly variable (if first recurrent
vein near first transverse cubital, as in some Mydrosoma, wing length under 12 mm)......
82sm
55 56
58
57
59
5(4). Pre-epistemal groove absent below scrobal groove [as in Fig. 58]; forewing length under 12
mm (Dissoglottini, part) (rare, tropical).... Mydrosoma (part) [6]
- Pre-episternal groove extending far below scrobal groove [as in Fig. 59]; forewing length
usually over 13 mm (Caupolicanini)............ ............6
6(5). Outer hind tibial spur of male immovably fused to tibia [Fig. 60]; hind basitarsus of female
about twice as long as broad [Fig. 61], second hind tarsal segment broader than main longitudinal
axis [Fig. 61]; metasomal terga usually weakly metallic greenish or bluish (uncommon, tropical to
SW) ......... ......Priloglossa [5]
- Outer hind tibial spur of male articulated at base like inner spur; hind basitarsus of female more
than twice as long as broad [Fig. 62], second hind tarsal segment longer than broad [Fig. 62];
metasomal terga nonmetallic ..7
cell
62
63
hind
cell
lod hind tarsal
segmenl6l 60
v
64pre-qristmal
groovegrmve
groove v
\,
v
v657(6). Base of marginal cell prolonged as nalrow sinus to apex of stigma [Fig. 63]; 57 of male
without paired apical lobes (rare, Mesoamerica)............ ...Crawfordapis l4l
- Base of marginal cell not sinus-like [Fig. 6a]; 57 of male with paired apical lobes ...............
Caupolicana l3f
8(4). Jugal lobe of hind wing absent, sometimes replaced by bristles [Fig. 65]; females (except in
parasitic groups such as Bombus (subgenus Psithyrus), Aglae, and Exaerete) with corbicula on
hind tibia formed from large, smooth, flat or concave area surrounded by fringe of long scopal
hairs [Fig. 67]; arolia absent [as in Fig. 204].......... ...................9
- Jugal lobe of hind wing present [Fig. 66]; corbicula on hind tibia absent [Fig. 68]; arolia variable
but sometimes present fas in Fig. 205] .r4
corbicula
66scopa
jugal lobe67 68
9(18). Proboscis in repose reaching beyond base of metasoma; body usually at least partially
metallic; deep, hairy groove on posterior surface of hind tibia of male [Figs.69,J0, and72); a
::::::::::::::::1::::t:::ll::::::::1t-1I: ::lli:li::::::::::1lll:tl::li;
- Proboscis in repose not reaching base of metasoma; body not metallic; posterior tibia of male
not deeply grooved; no comb of bristles on base of hind wing (Apidae, Bombinae)...Bombus l##) 69 70
'71
scutellum
10(9). Hind tibia of both sexes not over 1.5 times as broad as femur lFig.72l,that of female without
corbicula... ........11
- Hind tibia of both sexes over twice as broad as femur [Figs. 69 and 70], that of female with
corbicula ..t2
11(10). Scutellum with a tubercle on each side [Fig. 7l]; hind femur usually denticulate beneath
lFig.72l; metasomal terga and sterna without longitudinal median carina (rare).........
.............. Exaerete ll 58)
- Scutellum flat, not tuberculate; hind femur not denticulate; metasomal terga (especially 3 to 6)
and sterna 2 to 4 (also 5 in female) with longitudinal median carina (very rare)
.Aglae 1154)
l2(10). Labrum, mandible, and lower lateral portion of clypeus whitish; body usually brilliantly
metallic; posterior tibia of male with hairy groove not reaching rounded apex of tibia [Fig. 70];
middle tibia of male with one to three minute velvety patches at the proximal end of the large patch72
v
V[Fig.73].... Euglossa ll56l
- Labrum, mandible, and lower lateral portion of clypeus dark; body usually black or slightly
metallic, sometimes brilliantly so; posterior tibia of male with hairy groove reaching apex of tibia
between two strong teeth or spines [Fig. 69]; middle tibia of male with one elongate velvety patch
adjacent to or within proximal part of larger patch [Fig. 7a] .............1 3 \,
\,
v13(12). Labial palpus two-segmented; face nonmetallic, commonly with white marks on clypeus(uncommon).............. .......Eulaema 11571
- Labial palpus four-segmented; face metallic (sometimes only faintly so); clypeus without white
......Eufriesea 11551
14(8). Posterior portion of second recurrent vein distinctly arcuate distad [Fig. 79]; eyes usually
strongly convergent below [Fig. 81] (Colletidae, Colletinae, part) ..............Co\\etes ll)
- Posterior portion of second recurrent vein not arcuate distad [as in Fig. 80]; eyes variable, often
subparallel [as in Fig. 82]............. ........15
3nd
recurenl vein
79
8081
2nd
recurrenl vein Marginal cell pointed [Fig. 83] (or sometimes rounded as in Nomiinae [Fig. 84], in
tonla, and often in Ceratina [Fig. 85]*), apex on costal margin of wing or, if bent away
from margin or truncated, apex less than about three vein widths (of vein Rs on posterior side of
cell) frorn costal margin [Fig. 83]; stigma usually large, usually broader and much longer than
prestigma, margin u,ithin marginal cell usually convex (Some halictids have marginal cell
minutely trunc6G-at apei,-b'iirstigina is laig6IFG. 861:) ...:.............. .......16
ce ll
presti-rnra
85
84 8683
cel I
v- Marginal cell u,ith apex rounded [Fig. 87], truncate [Fig. 88], or, if pointed,
au,ay from costal marein, so that it is three or more vein widths from costal m
stigma commonly small, rarely broader than prestigma, usually little if any longer
margin within marginal cell usually straight_ot,.cencave (Exomalopsines [Fig. 90]
others go here in spite of large stigmata because of the apex of the marginal cell.)apex bent well
argin [Fig. 89];
than prestigma,
, epeolines, and
..37
prestigma
8987
90
88 v
v
\,16(15). Jugal lobe of hind wing very small, less than one-third as long as vannal lobe measured
from wing base [Fig. 9l]; scopa absent; first two segments of labial palpus elongate, flat, unlike
last two segments [Fig. 6] """"':t''"17
- Jugal lobe of hind wing at least one-third as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 92]; scopa of female
usually present; labial palpal segments similar, more or less cy-
lindrical fas in Fig. 8], except in Ceratina 23
91
jugal lobe
vannal lobe
jugallobe
vannal lobc
17(16). Mesepisternum seen from side with ventral portion slanting and approximately parallel to
profile of propodeum [Fig. 93]; 56 of female exposed, without processes, lobes, or spinelike setae
[Fig. 95]; integument smooth, largely impunctate, without areas of dense pubescence
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Osirini, part) (rare, tropical) ............. ......................18
- Mesepisternum with posterior ventral portion horizontal [Fig. 94], at an angle to propodeal
profile; 56 of female retracted, with only apical processes or lobes bearing coarse, spinelike setae
exposed; integument punctate or, if largely smooth, with areas of dense pubescence
(Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, Nomadini, part) ......19
dorsolateral angle of prclnotunr
93
mesgprslemunl
95
18(17). Dorsolateral angle of pronotum a bulging convexity [Fig. 93] with anteroposterior
dimension greater than or equal to genal width; mandible with two preapical teeth; 56 of female
long and tubular [Fig. 95], much exceeding T6............. Osiris ll28)
- Dorsolateral angle of pronotum much smaller, anteroposterior dimension about half of genal
width; mandible simple or with one preapical tooth; 56 of
female only slightly exceeding T6.......... ...........protosir"is ll29l9?
94 19(17\.lntegument almost entirely polished and impunctate; mesosoma flattened, greatest width
nearly twice height (rare, SW) ....Paranomada 11461
- Integument at least largely punctate; mesosoma not unusually flattened..... 20
v20(19). Apical portion of marginal cell bent away from wing margin [as in Fig. 79]; profile of T1
with anterior surface curving gradually onto dorsal surface (rare, SW). .....................21
-Apical portion of marginal cell on wing margin ornearly so las in Fig.80]; profile of T1 a
single, gentle curve, so that anterior and dorsal surfaces are not recogni2able.............. ...............22
2l(20). Over 8 mm in length; metasomal terga with unbroken apical pubescent fasciae [Fig. 96]
- Hexepeolus (pat) [143]
- Under 6 mm in length; metasomal terga with pubescent fasciae broken medially [Fig. 97]
Triopasites ll47l
22(20). Vertex and mesoscutum largely impunctate; middle coxa as long as distance from summit
to hind wing base [Fig. 98] (rare, W)... ..............Braclrynomada (part) l4a)
-Vertex and mesoscutum ordinarily punctate; middle coxa shorter than distance from summit to
hind wing base [Fig. 99] ............ Nomada (part) [la5]
9697
apical
fasc iae
pubescence
98 hind wing base 99wing baselateral
\
midcoxa midcoxa v
v
v
v
\,23(16). Shiny, hairs short and sparse, not forming metasomal bands; clypeus of female usually
with short, longitudinal median white or yellow bar; basal vein gently and uniformly curved [Fig.
1001; pygidial plate absent but apex of T6 of female pointed [Fig. 102]; long-tongued bees with
first two segments of labial palpus elongate and flattened, unlike last two [as in Fig. 6]
(Anthophoridae, Xyl ocopinae, Ceratinini, part) ...... Ceratina (part) [1a9]
-Usually hairier forms, often with metasomal bands of hair; clypeus of female without
longitudinal median pale bar; if body shiny and without bands, basal part of basal vein strongly
curved [Fig. 101];pygidial plate of female and many males present [Fig. 103], that of female often
hidden under T5; labial palpal segments, or at least last three of them, similar, not long and
flattened fas in Fig. 8] .24
basal basal
100101
(,.".,1r1 ! !
24(23). Apex of marginal cell rounded [Fig. 104]; posterior basitarsus of male usually as long as
or longer than tibia (Halictidae, Nomiinae). . . . . . ... .25
- Apex of marginal cell pointed [Fig. 105] or minutely truncate [Fig. 106]; posterior basitarsus
of male shorter than tibia........ ......_.....26 104
l08l
109
antonnalcell
lr0105
v
v106
25(241 68). Posterior marginal areas of terga not strongly colored, with hairs often forming apical
hair bands ..... Dieunomia l48l
- Posterior marginal areas of terga bare, smooth, and hairless, forming green, blue, or
yellow-green, enamel-like bands Nomia 149)
26(24). Middle tibial spur coarsely serrate with 8 to l0 large teeth [Fig1071 (Halictidae,
... Xeralictus [56] Rophitinae, part) (rare, SW).
- Middle tibial spur finely pectinate or ciliate, appearing simple under low magnifications [Fig.
......27
midlihia
t07108
ftrvea
CCC
sockel clypeusilt v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
v27(26). Antennal bases well below middle of face and usually separated from clypeus by little if
any more than diameter of antennal socket [Figs. 109 and 110]; clypeus short, transverse, its upper
margin not much arched upward fFigs. 109 and 110]; labrum nearly as long as clypeus (Halictidae,
Rophitinae, part) .............28
- Antennal bases near middle of face [Fig. I l1]; if below, then either separated from clypeus by
much more than diarneter of antennal socket (as in some Halictus) or mesosoma coarsely punctate
and basal area of propodeum coarsely striate or rugose (as in some Sphecodes); clypeus with upper
margin strongly arched upward, so that it is not short and transverse [Fig. 111]; labrum (excluding
apical process if present) much shorter than clypeus
28(27). Dorsal surface of propodeum about as long as metanotum [Fig. llZf (rare, Califomia,
Arizona) Protodufourea 154)
- Dorsal surface of propodeum longer than metanotum, about as long as scutellum [Fig. 113]
(sw)... ..29
29(28). Body minutely roughened and more or less dull; apical, truncate margin of clypeus more
than twice length of clypeus [Fig. 109] (uncommon).............. ....... Conanthalictus l50l
- Body largely shiny although with punctures, not minutely roughened; apical, truncate margin
of clypeus less than or equalto twice length of clypeus [Fig. 110] (rare) .-.-.....Sphecodosomal55)
30(27). Jugal lobe of hind wing about half as long as vannal lobe measured from wing base [Fig.
1141; scopa of female on hind tibia, not on basal segments of leg [as in Fig. 116] (Melittidae,
Melittinae, part) (rare) Melitta l59l
- Jugal lobe of hind wing long, much more than half as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 115]; scopa of
female (except in parasitic genera that lack the scopa) well developed on hind femur and...................30
..................3 1 sometimes trochanter [Fig. 117] ll4
jugal lobe
I15
jugalvannal
117v
Yscopa
scopa
il6
vannal lobe
31(30). Basal vein (first abscissa of M) straight or feebly arcuate [Fig. 118]; facial foveae present
in female and covered with short velvety hairs [Fig. 1l l] (Andrenidae, Andreninae, part) .........32
- Basal vein strongly arcuate or subangulate near base [Fig. 1 l9]; facial foveae absent (Halictidae,
Halictinae, part) Go to Chapter 8, Key to Genera of Halictinae
1r81r9
hasal veinbasal
32(3 1). Females......... JJ
- Males... 35
33(32). Hairs of hind trochanter rather dense, short, the longer ones simple, not much curved;
anterior surface of Tl broadly concave [Fig. 120], much longer than dorsal surface of tergum [Fig.l2l) (rare, SW) ... Ancylandrena 19)
-Some hairs of hind trochanter long, curved distally, plumose, forming a floccus closing basal
end of fern-oral corbicula [Fig. i l7]; anterior surface of Tl with smaller concavity or groove [Fig.
722), shorter than to slightly longer than dorsal surface [Fig. 123].. .........34 v
v
v
v120 121
groove
122123
34(33). Hind basitarsus more than half as long as hind tibia [Fig. 1 17]; stigma often broader than
prestigma (measured to wing margin), margins of stigma diverging from base of stigma to vein r
!::: i-lr :::i::::::::::""'' T::::::i3:::*:1"-:::::::: ::;;;ir:'d:#;i:;:,
- Hind basitarsus about half as long as hind tibia; stigma about as wide as prestigma (measured
to wing margin), margins parallel or nearly so from base of stigma to vein r [Fig. 125]; length of
stigma less than half distance from its apex to apex of marginal cell [Fig. l25f (rare, SW).............
Megandrena [11]
stigma
prestigma
124 125
35(32). Gonobase a naffow ring or essentially absent [Fig. 126]; mandible simple or with weak
preapical shoulder representing apex of pollex on upper margin [Fig. 128] (rare, SW)
Megandrena [ 1]
- Gonobase, with broad dorsal surface lFig.l27l; mandible with preapical tooth (apex of pollex)
on upper margin [Fig. 129] .36 v
v
v
v126 127 r28 129
gonobase
gonobase
36(35). Anterior surface of T1 largely convex, concavity a median longitudinal groove or
depression shorter than to slightly longer than distance from its apex to apex of T 1 [as in Figs. I 22
and 1231; hind basitarsus five or more times as long as wide ......... Andrena $tart) ll0l
- Anterior surface of Tl concave with median longitudinal line or groove, this surface usually
longer than distance from its apex to apex of T1 [Figs. 120 and 121]; hind basitarsus less than five
times as long as wide (rare, SW) . Ancylandrena l9l
37(15). Second submarginal cell small, triangular, petiolate toward marginal cell [Fig. 190]
(Andrenidae, Panurginae, part) ....Perdita (part) [17]
- Second subrnarginal cell not unusually small, usually quadrate, if triangular not or scarcely
petiolate fas in Fig. 191] ..............3 8
2sm
lsm
r90 r9t
recurrent
cellcell
recurrenlcell
veins
vcinst92 191\ \,
v
v
v
v
v38(15). Marginal cell slender, seven times as long as broad and only a little over half as wide as
widest submarginal cell fFigs. 191 and 192]; stigma absent [Figs. 191 and l92l (large, robust bees)
(Acanthopus approaches these characters but should be run to couplet 42; the enlarged,
multidentate apex of middle tibial spur distinguishes it from genera that should go to couplet 39.)
.39
- Marginal cell six times as long as broad or less, much more than half as wide as widest
submarginal cell [Fig. 193]; stigma usually distinct [Fig. 193], sometimes large.......... ...............42
?
39(38). Posterior basitarsus longer than tibia; second submarginal cell greatly narrowed toward
marginal cell [Fig. 191]; scopa largely on hind tibia [as in Fig. I 16] (Anthophoridae, Xylocopinae,
Xylocopini, part) ........ ....Xylocopa ll50)
- Posterior basitarsus shorter than tibia; second submarginal cell at least half as broad on anterior
as on posterior side [Fig. 192]; scopa well developed on hind trochanter and femur [as in Fig. 117]
(Oxaeidae) ,.,-....40
40(93). Metasomal terga or bands on them metallic green; maxillary palpus absent (rare, tropical)
Metasomal terga black, sometimes with iridescent metallic tints; maxillary palpus
six-segmented.
.41
41(40). Metasomal T6 of male and T5 of female with lateral tufts of long white setae (Fig. ##);
apical margin of male S8 emarginate medially (Fig 60-39 in Michener 
,?9'9,71;.,;:y":,olf"a l##l
-. Metasomal T6 of male and T5 of female without conspicuous lateral tufts of long white setae
(Fig. ##); apical margin of male S8 convex, not emarginated (Fig 60-3b in Michener 2007) [USA
& Mexicol .... Protoxaea l##l
kg 42(38). Middle tibial spur notched [Fig. l94l,bifrd, or multidentate [Fig. 195] at apex; scopa
absent; metasomal vestiture including metallic green or blue scales or forming striking pale
brownish to white and black patches of scales, or rarely integument bright metallic blue or green
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Ericrocidini)... 43
- Middle tibial spur pointed [Fig. 196], not notched or bifid (although with a preapical shoulder
in Epicharis); scopa present or absent; metasomal vestiture variable in color but not metallic green
or blue, usually not scalelike; integument not bright metallic blue or green......... .Jtrf
tg v
midtibia
19s 196
194
gv erolt p^\\t,rn(
43(42).Metasomal r,estitureforming black and white (to tawny) broken bands (mostly SW)
.......Ericrocis l97l
- Metasomal vestiture including green or blue metallic scales or, if not, then integument green or
blue (tropical) .44
44(43). Third submarginal cell receiving both recurrent veins [as in Fig. 1 91]; hind basitarsus very
long, with dense brush of long, dark, plumose hairs (rare)......... ..........Acanthopus l94l
- Second and third submarginal cells of forewing each receiving a recurrent vein [Fig. 193]; hind
basitarsus without dense brush of long, dark, plumose hairs.... .................45
45(44). Juncture of basal and discal surfaces of T1 rounded, never appearing angulate [Fig. 197];
mesobasitarsus with distal, flattened process on posterior margin, often continued basad as a
cariniform ridge [Fig. 199]; mandible usually with preapical tooth (uncommon)..............
Mesoplia 199)
- Juncture of basal and discal surfaces of T I angulate [Fig. 198]; mesobasitarsus without distal,
flattened, spinelike projection on posterior margin; mandible simple....... ..................46 v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
\,
\,19'7
r98meso-basitarsus
t99
46(45). Scutellum with two flat, platelike lobes directed caudad over metanotum and propodeum
[Fig. 200] (forewing dusky, with an apical cloud in marginal cell in addition to that at wing apex)(uncommon).............. ....Mesocheira l98l
- Scutellum bituberculate, with stout, subconical, and suberect projections [Fig. 201]..............47
200
201 202
47(46). Pronotum carinate between collar and lobe lFig. 202); mesepisternum with lamelliform
ridge between anterior and lateral surfaces lFig.202l; male antenna normal, not extending much
beyond tegula (rare) ... Aglaomelissa l95l
- Pronotum not carinate between collar and lobe, end of collar clearly defined; mesepistemum
abhiptly rounded between anterior and lateral surfaces; male flagellar segments greatly elongate,
flagellum extending well beyond apex of metasoma [Fig. 201] (rare) Ctenioschelus 196lS6
S6 48(42). Metasoma of female tapering (as in Coelioxys) [Fig. 203]; 56 elongate, tapering to acute
point beyond apex of T6, forming tube containing sting; T6 of female twice as long as basal width;
male without hind tibial spurs; male metasoma tapering as in female but ending in dense brush on
ll:":i:::T:t::::":i::::::::::::::T:i:::t:11"1 f* Ill:111 c.it,;,.",i", iiij
- Metasoma not tapering as in Coelioxys; 56 not so elongate, usually not acutely pointed; T6 of
female as long as its basal width or shorter; hind tibial spurs present; male metasoma not ending
in brush..... ........49
49(48). Arolia absent [Fig. 20a]
- Arolia present [Fig. 205] ....
204 205 206
Co
arolium
50(49). Outer hind tibial spur absent, inner spur and middle tibial spur coarsely pectinate [Fig.
206] (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Tetrapediini, part) (tropical)........... Tetrapedia ll33l
- Hind tibia with the usual two spurs; tibial spurs simple, minutely serrate or ciliate along margins2A3
...5 1v
T6
S6
..50
..54
207
[Fig. 183]
51(50). Scopa absent; flagellum of male greatly thickened, middle segments several times as wide
as long [Fig. 207]; marginal cell less than twice as long as stigma and not extending beyond third.){ v
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
\,submarginal cell [Fig. 208] (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Melectini, part) (W)
Zacosntia 1126)
- Scopa conspicuous on hind tibia of female; flagellum of male not thickened, middle segments
at most twice as wide as long; marginal cell much more than twice as long as stigma and extending
beyond third submarginal cell [Figs. 209-211]............... .........52
marginal cell
208 209
210 211
52(51). Second submarginal cell much shorter than first and smaller than first and third [Fig. 209];
stigma distinct, longer than broad [Fig. 209] (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Emphorini, part)
..Ptilothrix 193)
- Second submarginal cell equal to or longer than first on posterior margin [Figs. 210 and2lll;
third submarginal cell smaller than others; stigma a small transverse structure fFigs. 210 and2ll]
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Centridini, part) ..................53
53(52). Marginal cell longer than distance from apex to wing tip [Fig. 210]; a few extraordinarily
long, whiplike setae arising from preoccipital ridge behind summit of eye and usually reaching as
far as anterior margin of tegula lFig.212l (tropical) Epicharis l89l
- Marginal cell shorter than distance from apex to wing tip [Fig. 21 1]; extraordinarily long setae
arising from preoccipital ridge present or absent................ ....... Centris 188)
54(49). Scutellum strongly convex in profile, posterior margin (at least behind spines or tubercles
when these are present) at nearly right angles to anterior part [Fig.2la]; scutellar surface
sometimes bilobed, bituberculate, or bispinose [Fig. 216]; metanotum dec as is profile
\of
55 propodeum [Fig.2la]
- Scutellum less strongly convex, posterior third at angle of 1 10o or more to anterior part [Fig.
2l 5]; scutellar surface not bituberculate; metanotum often more nearly horizontal as is frequentlyI snr
base of propodeum......... 64 2t2
Ov
v
v
Vsetae
,!13sculum
scutellum
metanotum
propodeum
o
A' A
scutumax i lla
scutellum
metanolum
propodeum
axil
216 2t-l
55(54). Axilla produced posteriorly to angle or spine lateral to scutellum, rarely rounded but
protruding as lobe not continuing contour of scutellum [Figs. 214 and 217] (Anthophoridae,
Nomadinae, Epeolini, part).. 56
- Axilla simple, not produced [Fig. 216], usually continuing contour of scutellar margin.........59
56(55). Body largely covered with brilliant metallic blue-green scalelike hairs (rare, tropical)
... Thalestria ll39l
- Body without metallic hairs .57215scutum
scutellum !/
v
\7
\,57(56). Vein r arising near middle of stigma or three-fifths of stigmal length from base [Fig. 2l S];
margin of stigma in marginal cell convex [Fig. 218]; greatest length of marginal cell subequal to
greatest total length of the three submarginal cells; T5 of female with small, basal, longitudinal,
oval area depressed or surrounded by carinae (rare, tropical)............. ................Odyneropsis ll38)
- Vein r arising near apex of stigma [Fig.219]; margin of stigma in marginal cell not convex
[Fig. 219]; greatest length of marginal cell usually distinctly less than length of the three
submarginal cells; no defined oval area on T5 of female ........58
marginal cell
2r8 219
58(57,90 [check this]). T5 of female with a dark, beveled, pseudopygidial area, usually at least
half as long as broad lFig.220l; 56 of female with disc reduced to a traps-verse bar connecting a
pair of slender lateral processes armed apically with coarse, spinelike setae [Fig. 222); pygidial
plate of male usually more or less parallel-sided posteriorly, widened anteriorly, so that lateral
margins are sinuate; maxillary palpi usually three-segmented Triepeolus ll40l
- T5 of female with apical portion bearing short silvery pubescence, this area usually on same
plane as rest of tergum and less than half as long as broad lFig.22l]; 56 of female with large disc
and a pair of apical, spatulate, spiculate processes lFig.223l; pygidial plate of male with lateral
margins convergent, not sinuate; maxillary palpi usually two-segmented (Subgroups sometimes
recognized as genera are characterized in "Notes.") ........Epeolus 11371
p),gidial plat22Q
221
pygidial plate2?2
:: -)T5 j::i 59(55). Marginal cell longer than distance from its apex to wing tip [Fig. 224];body without areas
of appressed pale pubescence (or most of T1 and T2 covered with such pubescence); wings hairy
throughout, not or scarcely papillate lFig.229) 60
11t225
60(59). Hind tibia and basitarsus of both sexes with abundant hair at least as long as diameter of
leg, in female forming scopa (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Exomalopsini, part) (tropical)
......P aratetrapedia (part) ll22l
- Hind tibia and basitarsus without long hair; scopa absent .....6r
6l(60). Body length over 15 mm; T7 of male bidentate, without pygidial plate (Anthophoridae,
Anthophorinae, Rhathymini) (rare, tropical) ... ..62
- Body length under 11 mm; T7 of male not bidentate, with small elevated pygidial plate
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Osirini, part) (very rare, central and eastem North America)
Epeoloides ll27)
62(61). Mesepisternum with large submedian tubercle (Fig. ##) ; vein cu-v of hind wing strongly
oblique and distinctly longer than second abscissa of M+Cu (Fig. ##); supraclypeal area strongly
I 1 :1111 :l:::i : :Ylry ltl ::'""f,zi ;;;;:tJo;''',,'us (F i g ## )
-. Mesepisternum without tubercle (Fig. ##); vein cu-v of hind wing less strongly oblique and
shorter than or subequal to second abscissa of M+Cu (Fig. ##); supraclypeal areawith surface, in
general, a continuation of convexity of clypeus although with small frontal tubercle at lower end
of frontal line (Fig. ##) ........... Nanorhathymus l##lv
INEED FIGURES HERE FOR R/-11THYMTJS AND NANORHATHYMUSI- Marginal cell much shorter than distance from its apex to wing tip [Fig. 225];body with patches
(sometimes very small) of appressed pale pubescence; wings with large bare areas and apically
u,ith coarse papillae [Fig. 228] (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Melectini, part) .......................63 v
v
v
v
v
v
\,63(59). Inner rami of claws of middle and posterior legs broad, verlically expanded, lobelike
although subtruncate or pointed, not shaped like outer rami [Fig. 2261; T1 without or almost
without long hair similar to that of mesosoma................ .Xeromelecta 11251
- Inner rami of claws of middle and posterior legs pointed more or less like outer rami, not wider
than outer rami [Fig. 227);Tl with long hair like that of mesosoma....... Melecra ll24)
ramus
ramus
rallltls PaPillae
226
328
ramus
227
64(54). Closed cells of forewing largely hairless lFig. 2281; wing surface beyond veins coarsely
papillate and hairless (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Anthophorini)..... ..................65
- Entire forewing with numerous minute hairs [Fig. 229];wingsurface beyond veins not papillate
or, if so, with many papillae ending in hairs or with hairs intermixed with papillae ....................67
65(64). Marginal cell shorter than distance from its apex to wing tip, submarginal cells subtending
more than half of its length [Fig.230]; anterior and posterior margins of third submarginal cell
subequal; first recurrent vein ending near rniddle of second submarginal cell .....Anthophora l85l
- Marginal cell about as long as distance from its apex to wing tip, submarginal cells subtending
about half of its length [Fig. 23 1 ]; anterior margin of third submarginal cell shorter than posterior
margin; first recurrent vein ending near apex of second submarginal cell ......... .........66
230 23r
M-{uM+Cu
2t:c(-v
IJ-rcu-v 66(65). Vein cu-v of hind wing approximately transverse and much shorter than second abscissa
:: '::: '::r:1:::':::::::: :: :*: ::::::T::::::::: ::::::l: :: Y"i';;;;I;Zl
- Vein cu-v of hind wing slanting and about as long as second abscissa of M+Cu [Fig. 233];
proboscis in repose not reaching beyond forecoxae Habropoda [87)
67(64). Body shiny, no areas covered by dense hairs, often metallic; clypeus of female usually
with short longitudinal median white or yellow bar; hairs short and sparse, not forming metasomal
bands; body slender; pygidial plate absent but T6 of female pointed lFig. nal (Anthophoridae,
Xylocopinae, Ceratinini, part) Ceratina (part) [1a9]
- Body not shiny or else with areas covered by hairs, not metallic; clypeus of female without
longitudinal median pale bar;hairs dense and often obscuring surface in some areas, often forming
metasomal bands; body usually robust;pygidial plate usually present [as in Fig. 235) ..............68
cell
236 :38
239
237
jugal lobc
vannalY
\,
68(67). Marginal cell with apex rounded but on or almost on wing margin [Fig. 236]; first and
third submarginal cells subequal in length of posterior margins, ordinarily much longer than
second, which is quadrate;jugal lobe of hind wing about three-fourths as long as vannal lobe [Fig.
2391 (Halictidae, Nomiinae) .. back to 25234 v
\,
v
\,
v- Marginal cell with apex truncate or bent well away from wing margin [Figs. 237 and 2381;
submarginal cells not as above; jugal lobe of hind wing usually much less than three-fourlhs as
long as vannal 1obe...... 69
69(68). Posterior margin of first submarginal cell at least 1.3 times as long as third [Fig. 237]; body
elongate (like Andrena or Halictus); proboscis short; segments of labial palpus similar or only first
elongate fas in Fig. 8]... .,.,......... 70
- Posterior margin of first submarginal cell shorter than to scarcely longer than third [Figs. 238
and 2401or nearly 1 .3 times as long as third in Ancyloscelis, Exomalopsis, and others fFig. 2411,
which have short, robust bodies; body commonly robust; proboscis long; first two segments of
labial palpus elongate, flattened, entirely different from segments and 4 [as in Fig. 6] 
:.7S,
marginal
marginal cell
prestigmastigma
?41
70(69). Body extraordinarily coarsely punctate; certain metasomal terga with yellow to white
integumental bands; preoccipital ridge formed as strong lamella (Colletidae, Colletinae, part)
(uncommon, tropical to Arizona)... .... . . ... .....Eulonchoprial2l -
- Body not especially coarsely punctate; metasoma without integumental bands; preoccipital
ridge not lamellate... ...71
7l(70). Third submarginal cell longerthan second lFig.237l; clypeus
female with yellow; scopa primarily on tibia of female fas in Fig. 345]
part)
- Third submarginal cell shorter than second fas in Fig. 238]; face without yellow markings
(except when much of head is yellow); scopa primarily on femur of female [as in Fig. 3aa)
(Colletidae, Diphaglossinae, Dissoglottini, part) (rare, tropical) ........... .......Mydrosoma (part) 16]
72(122). Pygidial plate absent or so modified as to be unrecognizable in both sexes; basitibial plate
absent; scopa absent; metasomal vestiture includes patches of appressed plumose hairs [Fig. 491]
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Protepeolini) (rare, SW) Leiopodus ll30l
- Pygidial plate distinct in females and most males [Fig. 235]; basitibial plate distinct in females
and most males; scopa present on hind tibia and basitarsus; patches of appressed pubescence absent
on metasomal terga although hair bands commonly present...... ...............73of male and commonly of
(Andrenidae, Panurginae,
Protandrena [18] 73(72). Stigma three or more times as long as prestigma [Fig. 2411, except in some Exomalopsis
in which apical part of marginal cell is bent abruptly away from wing margin lFig. 2al)
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Exomalopsini, part) 74
- Stigma less than three times as long as prestigma [Fig. 240); apical part of marginal cell
gradually bent away from wing margin [Fig. 2a0] 77
74(73). Mandible simple fFig. 2a2l; body with abundant pale pubescence, often forming
metasomal bands or covering much of metasoma............... ......................75
- Mandible with preapical tooth on upper margin lPig.2a3); body without areas or bands of pale
pubescence .......76
75(74). Basitibial plate of female small, with surface planar (Fig. ##), or, if rnargins of plate
raised and central area with velvety pilosity, then transverse carina of T1 of female absent;
labrum and clypeus of male yellow or white [except dark in A. (Anthophorisca) levigata and A.
(Anthophot"isca) linsleyi]; outer side of penis valve without or u,ith small lateral process (cf Figs.
106-3a, d, g in Michener 2007); dorsal flange of male gonocoxite absent
Anthophorula
-. Basitibial plate of female large, central area with velvety pilosity separated from raised
margin by groove (Fig. ##), and transverse carina of Tl of female present (Fig. ##); labrum and
clypeus of male entirely dark; outer side of penis valve with strong lateral process; dorsal flange
of male gonocoxite present ....... .. Exomalopsis
INEED FTGURES HERE FOR ANTHOZHORULA AND EXOMZALOPSISI
76(74). Fore basitarsus with comb on inner margin (next to strigilis) lFig. 2aq; female with
thoracic venter and leg bases covered with hooked bristles (rare, tropical) ............. Monoeca ll2l)
- Fore basitarsus with comb on outer margin (opposite side from strigilis) fFig. 2a5); thoracic
venter and leg bases without hooked bristles (tropical) .....Paratetrapedia (part) 1122)
?47 ?45
0uter
242 :4) comh
tooth 24677(73). Second abscissa of vein M+Cu of hind wing less than two-thirds (often only half) as long
as M and less than 1.6 times as long as cu-v (often little longer than cu-v) [Fig. 246); vertex of
head convex seen from front lFig.2a9l (Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Emphorini, part).
.78
- Second abscissa of M+Cu of hind wing more than two-thirds as long as M and over 1 .6 times
as long as cu-v lFigs. 247 and248]; vertex not continuously convex seen from front or, if generally
convex, then flat or slightly concave between summit of eye and lateral ocellus [Fig. 250] (D
N4 *Cu
venex convexM+Cucu-vM
247
M*Cu
cu-t l\{
248
78(77). Proboscis in repose reaching base of metasoma .Melitoma 192)
- Proboscis in repose usually not reaching behind anterior coxae, not reaching base of metasoma
(rnostly W) ............ Diadasia l9l)
- 79(77). Hind wing with second abscissa of M+Cu three times as long as cu-v lFig.2a7); hind leg
of male greatly enlarged [Fig.251]; hind basitarsus of female without apical brush; antenna of:f ::ll:: ::::11 :: *: ::::::::::::""*" lT:*'::':ff),*i:;lffil
;venexflar
249 :50 2-51 152
basitarsal brush---tr - Hind wing with second abscissa of M+Cu usually not over twice (rarely about three times) as
long as cu-v [Fig. 248]; hind leg of male not enlarged; hind basitarsus of female with broad, dense
brush extending beyond base of second tarsal segment [Fig. 252]; antenna of male usually greatly
:::::::ill:: 1il*::::::::::'"-''::::::::3J,:"ffiii;:?1',?'JJ,;;;;r;;;;i
253 SI
gradulus
254SI
gradulus
80(2). Marginal cell distal to stigma on costa little if any longer than stigma and second
submarginal cell less than two-thirds as long as first* [Fig. 306] (second submarginal cell rarely
absent).... ..81
- Marginal cell distal to stigma on costa longer than stigma [Fig. 307] or, if not, then second
submarginal cell two-thirds as long as first or longer....... .......84
marginal cell
306 307
308 309
jugal lobr"
vannal lohe jugal lobc
vannal lotre
81(173). Jugal lobe of posterior wing less than one-fourth as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 308]; body
partly covered with appressed scalelike hairs [Fig. a96]; scopa absent (second submarginal celllsm
2sm v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
\,
v
\,
v
v
v
\,sometimes absent) (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, Neolarrini) (uncommon, mostly W)....................
.... Neolarua 11421
- Jugal lobe of posterior wing nearly three-fourths as long as vannal lobe or more [Fig.309];
body without dense appressed pubescence; scopa on hind tibia of female (Andrenidae, Panurginae,
Perditini, part) ......... ......82
82(81). Mandible with deep groove running diagonally across mandibular base to acetabulum
(Fig. l1b in Danforth 1996); episternal groove absent or short, not curving posteriorly to scrobe
(Fig. 7b in Danforth 1996) .Macrotera l##l
llb
-. Mandible lacking deep groove running diagonally across base (Fig. 11a in Danforth 1996);
epistemal groove usually curving posteriorly to scrobe (Fig. 7a in Danforth 1996)
............. 83"r@,
{s
,\$
1\1\
)
i1a
Ja
83(82). Metasoma broader than mesosoma and especially broad and depressed in male; hair of
hind tibia and basitarsus of male unusually abundant, fine and appressed; basitibial plate
developed in both sexes (head of male often greatly enlarged, facial fovea about three times as\
/ long as wide but weakly impressed; mandible of male with a broad biangulate or bidentate
expansion on inner margin)
Pseudomacrotera l##f
-. Metasoma not broadened in female, and at most only moderately depressed and broadened in
male; hair of hind tibia and basitarsus of male more or less long, curved, erect, and not much
:lt:::::i li *: :::::lt ::: ::i:::::1 :::'f,T;JixT.i"?,: dever'ped in femare
INEED FIGURES IIERE FOR PSEUDOMACROTERA AND PERDITA]
---\- 7 ,r"i v(' 1 \rH le in H 1l^"r
84(80). Second submarginal cell usually, little) if any, more than half as long as first or rarely
three-fifths as long [Fig. 310] and first recriFent vein received by first submarginal cell or meeting
first transverse cubital, rarely beyond it (if second submarginal cell is two-thirds as long as first,
then first recurrent vein clearly received by hrst submarginal cell); scopa absent (or in Chilicola
limited to S1 to 53 and sparse hairs on hind leg) ...........85
- Second submarginal cell usually at least two-thirds as long as first and, except in Hoplitis
(Formicapzs) and Panurginus and rarely others, receiving first recurrent vein [Fig. 311]; scopa
usually present ..........89
lsm
3103lt
I st recunent
vemlst recurrent
vcrn
85(84). Jugal lobe of posterior wing about three-fourths as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 312]; glossa
truncate or bilobed [as in Fig. 8].... .... 86
- Jugal lobe of posterior wing less than one-fourth as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 313]; glossa
pointed (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, part) ..........87I snr
Y
V v
v
v
v
v
\,
v3t2
313
jugal
vannal
jugal lobe
vannal lobe
3r4
86(85). Supraclypeal area between antennae abruptly and strongly elevated above antennal bases
[Fig.314]; both proboscidial fossa and prementum not longer than clypeus; scopa absent; face
usuallywithyellow, atleastonparaocularareas(Colletidae, Hylaeinae) ...... . .....Hylaeusl7l
- Supraclypeal area between antennae convex but not abruptly elevated above antennal bases;
proboscidial fossa and prementum much longer than clypeus; S I to 53 with scopa; face black or
with yellow on clypeus only (Colletidae, Xeromelissinae) (uncommon, tropical) ......Chilicola l8l
llllll "il::l ::::: ::::"- ::ll :: :::: *"'* !:li llll l.i**'ilu;;;;;ffi) ii;;i
- Apical portion of marginal cell curved away from wing margin [Fig. 316] 88
rnarginal cell
3rs
marginal
316 labrumlabrum
-)) I 318o
eoa
? 88(87). Labrum much longer than broad [Fig. 317]; body coarsely punctate (Ammobatoidini)
(uncommon).............. Holcopasites ll4ll
-Tl*-::::i:::Tt::: !::: :l:l::::r:::l:::::::: T1^';;::;:)f,2if;[Y,];i;;i
89(84). Axilla produced posteriorly as sharp angle or acute spine lateral to scutellum [Fig. 319]
....90
- Axilla not produced (rounded lateroposteriorly with no projection, usually continuing contour
of scutellar margin) or produced as a rounded lobe (in Rhynostelis) . ... . . .. . .....-..-.92
oo
3t9
90(89). Pygidial plate absent; labrum longer than broad; mandible with at least one preapical tooth
..91
- Pygidial plate present in both sexes [as in Fig. 320], although often hidden by T5 in females;
labrum broader than long; mandible simple (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, Epeolini, part) back to
58
91(90). Eyes hairy [Fig. 321] (except in female Coelioxys bisoncornua Hill from central U.S.A.);
metanotum without median tooth or spine (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Megachilini, part)
.....Coelioxys 176l
- Eyes bare; metanotum with median tooth or spine [Fig. 322] (Megachilidae, Megachilinae,
Dioxyini) (rare, W) .........Dioxys 175)v
Y
92(89\. Apex of marginal cell pointed on costa or separated from costa by only one or two vein
widths [as in Figs. 83 and 86]; stigma large (see couplet 26 for illustrations and more detail) ....93
- Apex of marginalcell(rounded, truncat{(or pointed and separated from costa by distance equgl
to several vein _widthslas in Figs. 87-901; stigma usually small (see couplet 26).......................104
Flqq4.lt-:-ol:''TS^L{ [.,i'i,,t*, v
v
\,
v
\,
v
v93(92). Basal vein strongly arcuate near base [Fig. 323] (Halictidae, Halictinae , part) ....
- Basal vein gently and rather uniformly arcuate or straight lFig.32q94
...95
o
321 322
basal vein
basal vein
2nd trans.
cubital
32s
94(93). Second transverse cubital and second recurrent veins weaker than nearby veins, at least in
females [Fig. 323]; femoral scopa distinct; body not especially coarsely sculptured fas in Figs. 149
and 152]; head narrow to moderately broad in frontal view [Fig. 326] (Subgroups sometimes
recognized as genera are characterized in "Notes."). .......... .. Lasioglossum (ytart) l40l
- Distal venation of forewing uniformly strong [Fig. 325]; scopa absent; body and especially base
of propodeum coarsely sculptured fas in Figs. 148 and 151]; head conspicuously broad in frontal
view [Fig.327] .. Sphecodes (part) [a7]
95(93). Labrum broader than long; scopa, if present, on hind legs [Figs. 34a-346]; claws cleft or)21
323
2nd
rccurrentrnctanotal
spine
,/
1
rccurrent2nd2nd trans.
cubiral
with inner preapical tooth fas in Figs. 328 and 3291... .96scutellum - Labrum rectangular, longer than broad [Fig. 330]; scopa of female on metasomal stema [Fig.
::l::l:::::::::::'':l:1*::::1T:::'::iillllil?lT:ll llil ;i;;;;;iil;i;;r
326
i2{l 329330
marginal cell
!-t-!
marginal cell
331
JJ.
96(95). Antennal bases well below middle of face and separated from clypeus by not much more
than diameter of antennal socket [Fig. 331]; clypeus short, transverse, its upper margin not much
arched up into face; labrum nearly as long as clypeus [Fig.331]; pre-episternal groove present
[Fig. 59] (Halictidae, Rophitinae, part) ................97
- Antennal bases near middle of face or, if below, separated from clypeus by much more than
diameter of antennal socket [Fig. 332]; clypeus with upper margin strongly arched up into face so
that it is not short and transverse; labrum, excluding apical process if any, much shorter than
clypeus; pre-epistemal groove absent below scrobal groove [Fig. 58] ......................99
97(96). Distance from apex of stigma to apex of marginal cell almost always at least as great as
distance from apex of cell to wing tip [Fig. 333]; S8 of male without spiculum, with a pair of basalvo'oo
o'oo v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
\,
v
vlobes (Subgroups sometimes recognized as genera are characterized in "Notes.")...
.Dufourea 15ll
- Distance from apex of stigma to apex of marginal cell less than or equal to distance from apex
of cell to wing tip [Fig. 334]; S8 of male with blunt median basal angle (spiculum, as in Fig.21)
and without basal lobes (SW)......... ..98
337
338
98(97). Dorsal surface of propodeum more than twice as long as metanotum [as in Fig. 336];
clypeal margin of female truncate or scarcely rounded between lateral tubercles [as in Fig. 337]
..... Micral icto ides l53l
- Dorsal surface of propodeum less than twice as long as metanotum [as in Fig.335]; clypeal
::::l: :::::i:::'""''::::i:i::*:: l:::::l ::::::i:: Tl3 llll lll'l' ,;;:,,,i,.,i. iiit
99(96). Jugal lobe of hind wing small, one-sixth as long as vannal lobe or less [Fig. 339]; scopa
absent; proboscis long, first two segments of labial palpus long and sheathlike, unlike last two
segments [Fig. 6] (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, Nomadini, part) 100
- Jugal lobe of hind wing one-fourth to over three-fourths as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 340]; scopa
present on hind legs of female; proboscis short, the four labial palpal segments similar, not long
and sheathlike [Fig. 8]............... .........102
100(99). Metasomal terga with bands of appressed, pale pubescence [Fig. 96]; body black or
metasoma red (rare, SW) .......... Hexepeolus (part) [143]scutellum metanotum
:rdeum
o c)o
ooo
- Metasomal terga without pubescent bands; body often red or black with yellow areas.........101c 101(100). Mandible with anterior (acetabular) articulation more distant from eye than posterior
(condylar) articulation [Fig. 3a1].. Nomada (pat) [1a5]
- Mandible with articulations equidistant from eye [Fig. 342] (rare, W)
. -.....Brachynomada (part) [ 1 a]
339
jugal lobe
vannal lohe
34r
jugal lobe
vannal lobe
102(101). Female with distinct facial foveae covered with dense, short hairs [Fig. 343]; scopa well
developed on hind femur and trochanter [Fig. 344]; two subantennal sutures under each antenna
[Fig.3a3] (Andrenidae, Andreninae, part) .Andrena (pat) [0]
- Facial foveae absent; scopa principally on hind tibia [Figs. 345 and 346]; one subantennal suture
under each antenna (Melittidae, part) ......103
345340
{5t+ /!
346
343
lacial lbvea
scopa+scopa
basirarsus\
basitarsusscopa
subanlcnnal sutures
,l:'
103(102). Posterior basitarsus of both sexes more slender than, and nearly as long as, posterior
tibia [Fig. 345] (Dasypodinae) .........Hnperapis l57l v
v
v
v
v
Y
\7
\,
v- Posterior basitarsus of male less than half as long as tibia, of female conspicuously shorter than
and as broad as tibia [Fig. 3a6] (Melittinae, part) (uncommon, eastem and northem North America):--=..:::::::iufr drop-sfi 8l
104(92). Mandible tridentate, middle tooth longer and more elevated than the others lPig. 3a7l;
outer surfaces of tibiae, at least in female, with numerous coarse spicules not bearing hairs or
bristles [Fig. 3a8]; labrum longer than broad (Megachilidae, Lithurginae) (mostly W)...................
- Mandible simple or with lower tooth longest [as in Figs.372 and 375], number of teeth variable;
outer surfaces of tibiae, if spiculate, with a bristle arising from apex of each, except in some
parasitic forms that lack scopa and have labrum broader than long ........106105
r07348 349
350jugal lohe
jugal lobevannal Iobe
vannal lobe
105(104). Arolia absent or rudimentary in both sexes; facial prominence of female involving
upper part of clypeus and usually also part of supraclypeal area; first flagellar segment about
twice as long as broad, more than twice as long as second, which is much broader than long
Lithurgus l##l
-. Arolia present in males, absent in females; facial prominence of female entirely supraclypeal
(absent in one species); first flagellar segment not or little longer than broad, slightly longer than
to shorter than second, which is nearly as long as broad to longer than broad
.... Lithurgopsrs [##]
106(104). Jugal lobe of hind wing less, usually much less, than two-thirds as long as vannal lobe
[Fig. 3a9]; proboscis long; first two segments of labial palpus long, sheathlike, unlike segments 3
and 4 [Fig. 6]
- Jugal lobe of hind wing at least nearly three-fourths as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 350]; first two
segments of labial palpus not long and sheathlike, either all four segments similar or only first
segment elongate [Fig. 8] (Andrenidae, Panurginae, part) ....124 107(106). Marginal cell not or scarcely extending beyond submarginal cells fas in Fig.351]
(Anthophoridae, Anthophorinae, Melectini, part) (very rare, "Nevada") ....-...Brachymelecta ll23)
- Marginal cell extending well beyond second submarginal cell fFigs. 352 and 353]... 108
108(107). Apex of marginal cell bent sharply away from wing margin, so that it is obliquely
truncate [Fig. 352]; mandible simple; scopa, when present, on hind tibia and basitarsus...........109
- Apex of marginal cell gradually bent away from wing margin [Fig. 353], pointed or narrowly
rounded; mandible usually with one or more teeth above the long lower tooth (rutellum); scopa,
when present, on metasomal stema 110
vccll
marginai cell
2sm
Ism
-1-\ I
354
jugal loheI
I
I
!l5:
jugal lobc
vannalcell
?snr
lsm
353
3si
yannal lobe
109(108). Jugal lobe of hind wing at least one-third as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 354]; scopa well
developed on hind tibia and basitarsus; labrum much broader than long (Anthophoridae,
Anthophorinae, Exomal opsini, part) ............. .Anthophorul a(part) [120]
- Jugal lobe of hind wing less than one-third as long as vannal lobe [Fig. 355]; scopa absent;
l:::: :::l l::::: ":: :::1 :":::::T::::1'::iTi:: ^::::::':'),':3[),,.,, i,", iiiii
110(108). Labrum much broader than long [Fig. 356]; mandible simple or with a single preapical
tooth on upper margin; scopa absent (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae, part) (rare, SW) .................1 I 1 v
v
v
v
\,- Labrum longer than broad [Fig. 357]; mandible with one to several teeth or a long apical margin
above lower tooth (which is mandibular apex) [Figs. 377,372, and 375] (Megachilidae,
Megachilinae). .1 13
357
labrunr laLrrum basal
1 srn
lsm
36r
360
111(110). Scape, excluding basal bulb, less than twice as long as broad [Fig. 358]; T6 of female
without pygidial plate, apical margin broadly concave; rnandible with preapical tooth (Neolarrini,
part).......... ....... Biastes (subgenus Neopasites) [135]
- Scape, excluding basal bulb, more than twice as long as broad [Fig. 359]; T6 of female with
pygidial plate (incompletely defined in Rhopalolemma), apical margin not concave; mandible
simple....... ......112
112(111). Anterior margin of second submarginal cell less than one-third of posterior length [Fig.
3601; T5 of female without pseudopygidial area; T6 of female with well-defined pygidial plate and
no pygidial fimbria (Townsendiellini, part).......... ................Townsendiella (part) [1a8]
- Anterior margin of second submarginal cell nearly half length of posterior margin [Fig. 361];
T5 of female with pseudopygidial area about three times as wide as long; T6 of female with
pygidial plate indicated laterally by carinae, but apex with a pygidial fimbria of short hairs and no
sharply defined apex of the plate (Neolarrini, paft).......... .............Rhopalolemma |361
113(200). Mesosoma andlor metasoma with yellow or white (rarely red) integumental markings
or rarely entire body red with black or yellowish markings; metasomal terga ordinarily without
apical bands of pale hair (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Anthidiini, part) Go to Chapter 10, Key
to Genera of Anthidiini359 358 156
I - Mesosoma and metasoma u,ithout integumental markings, entire body black or metallic or
metasoma alone red; metasomal terga often with apical bands of pale hair (rarely terga with narrow
apical cream-colored margins) ............. ..............114
114(113). Middle tibia with two spines at apex on outer side [Fig. 362) (for small specimens,
examine in distal view); scopa of female absent (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Anthidiini, part)
(uncommon)................ Stelis (part) t73l
...1 t5- Middle tibia with one apical spine [Fig. 363]; scopa of female present
115(114). Margin of stigma in first submarginal cell shorter than or about as long as width of
stigma [Fig. 390]; claws of female cleft or with inner preapical tooth [as in Figs. 361 and 368];
clypeus and paraocular area of male usually yellow or cream-colored (Subgroups sometimes
recognized as genera are characterized in "Notes.") (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Anthidiini, part)
.....Trachusa (pafl ja)
- Margin of stigma in first submarginal cell longer than width of stigma [Fig. 391]; claws of
female simple or with basal tooth; clypeus and paraocular area not yellow or cream-colored363 362
...... I 16
I sinstigma
lsm?snr
3S0 3912sm v
v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
v
\,116(115). Arolia absent [Fig. 367] (Subgroups sometimes recognized as genera are characterized
in "Notes.") (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Megachilini, part)....... ........Megachile 177)
- Arolia present [Fig. 368] (Megachilidae, Megachilinae, Osmiini, part) ... tt7
367 368
arolium
117(116). Base of propodeum with narrow horizontal zone, set off by a carina from posterior
surface and traversed by carinae breaking it into a series oflarge pits [Fig. 392); anterior surface
of Tl broadly concave and delimited by strong carina........ Heriades 180)
sn"lt)
- Base of propodeum not separated by a carina from posterior surface and without a series of
strong pits (if carina and pits evident, basal zone usually sloping and anterior surface of T1 not
concave and delimited by strong carina) 118
oo
392393 394
line line
118(117). Parapsidal lines punctiform or at most three times as long as broad [Fig. 393]; body
usually metallic ... Osmia l82l
- Parapsidal lines linear [Fig. 39a]; body rarely metallic (although sometimes strongly so) ...119
119(118). Hind coxa with longitudinal carina (often weak) ventrally near mesal margin [Fig. 395]
120oo
- Hind coxa not carinate ventrally .12t 120(119). Male with seven exposed metasomal terga; clypeus of female without median horn;
metasoma of female red (rare, California) ... Xeroheriodes [84)
- Male with six exposed metasomal terga, T7 retracted and weakly sclerotized; clypeus of female
with median apical spatulate horn [Fig. 396]; meta soma black (W).... ... .. Protosmia l83f
121(119). Mesepisternum with anterior surface separated from lateral surface, at least below, by
weak carina [Fig. 3971, anterior surface smooth and shining, lateral surface punctate; T6 of male
four-toothed [Fig. 398] (mostly W) ............-..Ashmeadiella l78l
- Mesepisternum with lateral surface rounding onto anterior surface with no sharp boundary or
sharp change in sculpturing; T6 of male not four-toothed......... ..............122
395 396
coxa
S3
39"/
o
398 C
eT4
!o,flfaiv!nrlr,,-w
lateral surface
canna
surface
122(l2l). Body very slender, shortest distance between tegulae less than or equal to length of
scutum . -...... Chelos toma (part) [79]
- Body less slender, shortest distance between tegulae greater than length of scutum (Subgroups
sometimes recognized as genera are characterized in "Notes.") .. .. . . . .. .............. 123
123(122). T1 with anterior surface not broadly concave or flat, not margined above by sharp line
except sometimes medially, profile of T1 convex, not angulate; parapsidal line often over half as
long as tegula (Fig. 39a) [need to check]; 56 of male with basal, hairless translucent flapsoo$ (sometimes joined together) arising at gradulus and extending posteriorly, lying against ventral
surface ofsternum Hoplilis l##l
- anterior surface of Tl a broad, concave or flat area margined above by a shary line usually as
long as one-half width of Tl although much less in some [e.g., A. (Atoposmia) elongata
(Michener)], profile of Tl thus angulate at summit of anterior surface; parapsidal lines usually
less than half as long as tegula (Fig. 393) [need to check]; 56 of male without basal flaps;
(western North America, Mexico) Atoposmia l##)
124(106\.Inner subantennal suture little if any longer than diameter of antennal socket [Fig. 399];
anterior tentorial pit in lower end of outer subantennal suture;* 55 of female with distal margin
convex; margin of 55 of male usually with well-developed median apical projection and of 54
usually with median apical convexity or projection [Fig. a0l] (Subgroups sometimes recognized
as genera are characterized in "Notes.") . ... . ....... ................Ca11iopsis ll3l
*This is a difficult character because the pit sometimes invades the junction of the epistomal and
outer subantennal sutures. However, the distinction is usually evident.
- Inner subantennal suture usually much longer than diameter of antennal socket [Fig. a00];
anterior tentorial pit at junction of outer subantennal suture and epistomal suture or in latter suture
below junction (outer subantennal suture absent in some Heterosarus and Pseudopanurgus); 35
of female with distal margin straight or concave; 54 and 55 of male without apical projections.....
.,.,..,.125
125(124). Pre-episternal groove completely absent fFig. a04; first recurrent vein meeting first
transverse cubital or nearly so [Fig. aOa]; 56 of male with thickened median apical truncate or
emarginate projection (not tropical)... Greeleyella (: P anurginus) ll 6l
- Pre-epistemal groove present [Fig. a03] (sometimes very weak), directed anteroventrally from
upper end, in some minute species visible only at upper end (and hair must be removed to see it);
first recurrent vein usually considerably distal to first transverse cubital [Fig. a05]; 56 of male
without thickened apical projection, margin thin and emarginate or cleft Protandrena l##l
{ 399o
inner400 40r
\,
\,sl
15
apical
4()2
pre-episternal groove
I st trans. cubital
I sl recunenlI st trans.
lsl
404 405 V
v
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
vChapter 7 - Key to Genera of Meliponini (modified from Michener 2007)
lupdared 7/8/20221
1. Base of marginal cell broad, basal angle (between stigmal margin and vein r, within marginal
cell) slightly acute (not under 68o) to right-angular; marginal cell, at apex of stigma, broader than
submarginal cell area; forewing less, usually much less, than 4 mm long ..2
- Base of marginal cell of usual shape, basal angle strongly acute (not over 50o); marginal cell,
at apex of stigma, little if any broader than submarginal cell area; forewing usually over 4 mm
long .3
2(1). Legs and antennae very long, scape attaining anterior ocellus Dolichotrigona l##)
- Legs and antennae ordinary in length, scape not attaining anterior ocellus by at least 1.5 times
the ocellar diameter.... .....Trigonisca [##]
3(1). Inner surface of hind tibia with strongly depressed, shining, upper marginal zone, which at
least apically is usually about as broad as longitudinal median keirotrichiate ridge, and midway
of tibial length is at least half as wide as keirotrichiate ridge lM\{i}: irig. 411 ............... ................4
- Inner surface of hind tibia with depressed upper marginal zone narower (much less than half
as wide as area with keirotrichia; fiv'tMD: fiS. a,1l) or absent, keirotrichia extending to or close to
margln.. 11
40 ill A'44
plumose kcirotrichia simplc
hails43
I
I3
lr. 4(3). Face short and broad, minimum distance between eyes much greater than length of eye;
clypeus less than twice as broad as long; malar space almost twice as long as flagellar diameter;
keirotrichiate zone on inner surface of worker hind tibia nearly twice as wide as depressed upper
marginal zone at midlength of tibia .Oxytrigona l##)
- Face of ordinary shape, minimum distance between eyes little more than to less than length of
eye; clypeus usually more than twice as broad as long; malar space little over 1.5 times as long
as flagellar diameter or usually much less; keirotrichiate zone on inner surface of worker hind
tibia usually narrower, rarely over L5 times as wide as depressed upper marginal zone at mid
length of tibia
v- Preoccipital carina absent; lower face and genal area finely sculptured like upper part of head
and scutum.. 6
6(5). Mandible of worker with four or five teeth along distal margin; inner surface of hind
basitarsus of males and workers with basal sericeous area.... ...Trigona l##l5
7- Mandible of worker with lower half or two-thirds of distal margin edentate, upper part of
margin with one or usually two teeth; inner surface of hind basitarsus of males without basal
sericeous area, that of workers, variable...
7(6). Metasoma short, about as wide as thorax, dorsoventrally flattened; upper margin of hind
tibia of worker usually with few plumose hairs, most of them with only two to six scattered
branches not concentrated toward apices; yellow markings absent; vein M of forewing dark
almost to wing margin .. Geotrigona l##l
- Metasoma usually narrower than thorax, often noticeably elongate; upper margin of hind tibia
of worker with numerous strongly plumose hairs, usually with abundant branches toward apices
l\,{Ntll}: Fig. 4{}l; yellowish or reddish markings present on face of some species; vein M of
forewing usually fading away near widest part of wing... 8
8(7). Inner surface of hind basitarsus of worker with basal sericeous area covered with minute
setae or sometimes lacking setae......... Tetragonisca l##l
- Inner surface of hind basitarsus of worker without basal sericeous area, rather uniformly
setose........ 95(4). Preoccipital carina strong and shining across full width behind vertex; lower face and genal
area shining and coarsely punctate in contrast to dull, densely, minutely punctate upper face,
genal area and scutum ........ ......Cuphalotrigona l##] v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v9(8). Labial palpi with large, sinuous setae on first two palpomeres Frieseomelitta l##l
- Labial palpi with setae no longer than palpal width and straight or nearly so..........................10
10(9). Metapostnotum bare. Tetragona l##f
- Metapostnotum covered with plumose pubescence (at least laterally)............ . Ptilotrigona l##l
11(3). First flagellomere of worker nearly as long as second plus third taken together [M$4I]:
I iu. 361, of male nearly as long as second; outer surface of hind tibia convex, without corbicula,
lower margin convex like upper margin i\'{N4D: Irig. 38.1; penicillum absent; rastellum consisting
of tapering hairs ......... . Lestrimelitta l##l
- First flagellomere of worker shorter than second plus third taken together [\,{N4D: Fig. 37], of
male much shorter than second; outer surface of hind tibia of worker (and some males) flat or
concave at least distally, forming corbicula, lower margin gently convex to concave, unlike
largely or wholly convex upper margin l\4\'lI): F'ig. -191; penicillum present; rastellum variable
t2
tiv
1
corbicula
37 38 39
12(11). Hamuli 9-14 (rarely 8); wings extending little if any beyond apex of metasoma; stigma
with margin within marginal cell straight or weakly concave i\{Z$(}T: Fig. } 2{}-1al @ody
apiform; metapostnotum dull, hairy) ..Melipona l##l
- Hamuli 5-7 , rarely up to 9 or even l0; wings long, extending well beyond apex of metasoma;
'::::::::::::::::.:::"'*li::ll:T:l:::::::l:l:ii- lt: l-l-lil::: :: ::: :::: l;36I
I
Ia
\ l](r-a I l()-c
13(12). Anterior part of scutellum with shining, longitudinal V- or U-shaped median depression
opening anteriorly into scutoscutellar fossa lM1\41): Irigs 48. 50]; preoccipital carina present,
extending far down on each side of head ....t4
- Anterior part of scutellum without such a shining, median depression [MMD: Fig. 49];
preoccipital carina absent or with transverse part only, behind vertex and weakly indicated
v
v
v............1 5
scutellum
scutum i scututn scuLum scutum
49 50 5l
14(13). Head and thorax, or at least scutellum, with extremely coarse, cribriform punctation;
posterior margin of scutellum notched or emarginate medially as seen from above ll4MD: Fig.
50]; anterior margin of pronotal lobe with strong, transverse carina.. Nannotrigona
- Head and thorax with fine punctation; posterior margin of scutellum entire; anterior margin of
pronotal lobe rounded |MML): Fig. 511 .............. .. Scaptotrigona48
15(13). Mandible of worker with four apical teeth (lower two sometimes united by translucent
septum but teeth still recognizable); scutellum, as seen in lateral view projecting posteriorly as
thin shelf over median part of metanotumscutellum scutel lunl\
t6I
I
I
I
I V
v
v
\,
v
v- Mandible of worker with (rarely without) one or two denticles at upper end of apical margin,
otherwise without teeth; scutellum, as seen in lateral view, rather thick and rounded, not
projecting as thin shelf over metanotum t7
16(15). Surface of metasomal terga dull, as most of the body; pubescence very short and almost
imperceptible in the head, mesosoma and metasoma (erect setae rarely noticeable)
Paratrigona
- Surface of metasomal terga shiny and distinct from the dull integument of other body parts;
pubescence generally conspicuous ............... .......- Aparotrigona
17(15). Hind tibia of worker greatly broadened, spoon-shaped, about three times as wide as
femur, outer surface largely occupied by corbicula, lower firargin of tibia with distal one-half
convex |MMD: Fig. 441; metapostnotum denselyhairy...... ........Partamona
- Hind tibia of worker not greatly broadened [MM$: Figs 4S" 42], less than three times as wide
as fernur, corbicula extending but little if at all basad of middle of tibia, lower margin of tibia
convex only in distal one-fourth or less; metapostnotum usually hairless ..................18
18(17). Malar space about one-fifth as long as eye; upper margin of hind basitarsus strongly
convex medially; yellow markings absent ....... Meliwillea
- Malar space much less than one-flfth as long as eye; upper margin of hind basitarsus gently
convex; yellow markings almost always present, at least on face .............19
{:
l9(18). Upper margin of inner surface of hind tibia not depressed, although shiny and in contrast
to keirotrichiate area; concave surface of corbicula occupying full width of distal half of hind
tibia .......... ..........Nogueirapis
- Upper margin of inner surface of hind tibia strongly depressed, shiny, in sharp contrast to
keirotrichiate area; concave surface of corbicula usually not occupying whole distal half of hind
20(19). Hind basitarsus thickened, nearly as broad as or broader than tibia fM2(}{}?: Fig. 120- i 3l
(face without yellow markings) ... Scaura
- Hind basitarsus flat, much nalrower than tibia fh{lv{t}: Fig. a3] Plebeiaa. Chapter 8 -- Key to Genera of Halictinae
lupdated 6/28/20221
(modified from various sources, including Michener 2007, Goncalves 2021, and original key to
Halictini, Caenohalictini). Figure needs are highlighted in yellow.
1 . Longitudinal median specialized area of T5 of female of nonparasitic forms not divided by a
notch or cleft (Fig. 13$; parasitic forms (recognized by loss or reduction of scopa and other
pollen-carrying and manipulating structures) nonmetallic or with dull greenish coloration; T7 of
male with a transverse ridge, usually carinate, forming a false apex beneath which the tergum is
strongly reflexed to the morphological apical margin, surface above the transverse ridge usually
with a recognizable hairless pygidial plate......... .......................2
v-. Longitudinal median specialized area of T5 of female of nonparasitic forms divided by a
notch or cleft in tergal margin (Fig. 13f); parasitic forms mostly brilliant metallic green; T7 of
male without pygidial plate and without transverse premarginal ridge or carina forming a false
apex (Augochlorini) ...
1)(
tit'l'3,.....,,,...25
CT3 'l'4
.vr|
t90
2(1). Eyes pilose [as in Fig. 321; probobly best to make na,v
figuref, with erect hairs at least half as long as diameter of
amedian ocellus (Caenohalictini, part)
- Eyes glabrous or with minute hairs much less than half as
long as diameter of median ocellus...... ................12
32t \,
\,
v
v
v3(2). Fernales....
- Males............4
8
4(3). T1 with apicolateral carina [Fig. 159]; T2-T4 with lateral gradular carinae [Fig. 159];
metasoma lacking metallic coloration (rare, tropical) Rhinetula 146l
- Tl without apicolateral carina [Fig. 160]; T2-T4 without lateral gradular carinae [Fig. 160]
or, if carinae present, then metasoma brilliant metallic blue to green 5
lateral gradular carinae
159 r60
5(4). Hairs on eye subequal to ocellar radius; T2-T4lacking metallic coloration and with distinct
basal yellow bands (sometimes hidden by preceding terga) (rare, tropical)...................
....Agapos temonoides 13 5)
- Hairs on eye subequal to ocellar diameter; metasomal terga usually with metallic coloration
basally and lacking yellow bands 6
6(5). lnner hind tibial spur with 3 or 4 teeth [Fig. 161]; propodeum with dorsal surface about twice
as long as metanotum in dorsal view [Fig. 163] (rare, tropical) .......Caenohalictus 136l
- Inner hind tibial spur with 5-11 teeth fas in Fig. 162]; propodeum with dorsal surface less than
1.5 times length of metanotum in dorsal view [Fig. 164] (rare, mostly Mesoamerican).................7
7(6). Metasomal terga brilliant metallic blue or green; T2-T4 with distinct lateral gradular carinae
[Fig. 16s] ...........P aragapos temon 143)
- Metasomal terga with metallic tints absent or reduced to inconspicuous basal bands; terga
without lateral gradular carinae [Fig. 160] .................Dinagapostemon l37lapicolateral
canna 8(3). T2-T4 with lateral gradular carinae [Fig. 165]..
- Metasomal terga without lateral gradular carinae [Fig. 160]......,9
t0
Y161 162
Iateral gradular
cannae
tarsomere 2
165167
9(8). Metasoma brilliant metallic green or blue dorsally; propodeum in side view angulate with
distinct dorsal and posterior surfaces [Fig. 16a] (rare, Mexico)............ .........Paragapostemon l43l
- Metasoma without metallic coloration; propodeum in side view declivous, without distinct
dorsal surface [Fig. 166] (rare, tropical) ................... Rhinerula 146l
10(9). Hind tarsomeres I and 2 fused [Fig. 167]; propodeum less than 1.5 times as long as
metanotum viewed from above fas in Fig. 164]; clypeus yellow on lower three-fourths.............1I
- Hind tarsomeres 1 and2 articulated, free; propodeum nearly twice as long as metanotum viewed
from above [Fig. 163]; clypeus with yellow restricted to lower margin (rare, tropical).
............. Caenohalictus l36fscutcllum
metan()lunl \,
\,
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v1f(10). T2,T3, and./or T4 with basal or basilateral yellow maculae; hind femur not swollen and
lacking ventral tooth (rare, tropical) ......Agapostemonoides l35l
- Metasomalterga without yellow maculae; hind femur swollen and with ventral tooth [Fig. 168]
(rare, Mesoamerica to Andes).. .................Dinagapostemon l37l
l2(2). Body at least partly bright green or blue in both males and females; males with bright
yellow or cream areas on clypeus, legs (including bases) and usually elsewhere; inner hind tibial
spur in female pectinate with a few large teeth (Caenohalictini, part)......... ...............13
- Body typically non-metallic; if metallic usually weakly so; inner hind tibial spur in female
variable (serrate to weakly pectinate with a few small teeth) (Halictini, Sphecodini) ..................14
13(12). Posterior surface of propodeum enclosed by distinct carina [Fig. 169]; metasomal terga of
female metallic green or blue or black to amber, of male black to amber with conspicuous yellow
:::i:1::::l1til:ll :T::::::::::::::::l::*:::::::l* ^-:'1;":;:::il:"i\:-l
-Posterior surface of propodeum without distinct marginal carina las in Fig. 170]; metasoma
nonmetallic black to brown, commonly with distinct yellow maculae or bands in female, usually
with little or no yellow in male; metasoma of male slender, petiolate fas in Fig. 170] (rare, tropical)
.... -........... H abralictus l38l
hind fenrur
l68 169
14(12). Females
- Males...........
1 5(14). Scopa present (Halictini, part).................
- Scopa absent (Sphecodini, parasitic Halictini)170
.15
.22
....16
....1 8 16(15). Distal veins of forewing (third and often second transverse cubital and second recurrent)
weaker than other veins (e.g., first transverse cubital) [Figs. 143 and 144]; not brilliantly metallic
except in a few, mostly Antillean species; metasomal tergawithout hair basal hair
bands present [Fig. la6] or absent (see Notes for a key to ) ..... Lasioglossum (pat) [a0]
- Distal veins of forewing strong [Fig. la5]; coloration and hair bands variable .....17
l7(2). Metasomal terga with apical hair bands (Fig. 147); non-metallic to weakly metallic
Halictus l##l
- Metasomal terga without apical hair bands; often weakly metallic (rare, largely restricted to
high elevation [>1600m] cloud forests)...... ....... Mexalictus [##]
18(15). Distal veins of forewing (third and often second transverse cubital and second recurrent)
weaker than other veins (e.g., first transverse cubital) [Figs. 143 and 144]; propodeum dorsal
surface smooth Lasioglossum (pari"; parasitic species)
- Distal veins of forewing strong [Fig. i45]; propodeum coarsely areolate .......... I 9
basal hair bandshair bandsapicalv
Y
v
Yl+_) 144 145
147 \,
v19(18). Inner orbits of eyes strongly converging below (Fig. 135); head little wider than long
(Fig. 135); clypeus about twice as broad as long; carina across pronotum, between dorsolateral
angles, continuous; surface of 52 conspicuously convex in profile, its base strongly depressed,
suggesting strong constriction between S1 and 52; body tomentum yellowish, usually dense and
covering terga.......... ...... Ptilocleptis l##)
- Inner orbits of eyes usually not strongly converging (Fig. 136); head distinctly wider than
long, as seen in frontal view (Fig. 136); clypeus three or more times as wide as long, rarely only
twice as broad as long; carina between dorsolateral pronotal angles incomplete; surface of 52
usually not strongly convex in profile, apparent constriction between S1 and 52 being weak;
body tomentum, when present, whitish, not dense nor coveringterga....... .................20
135 136
clypeus clypcus
.,-t I
lJ/138
20(19). Free part of marginal cell at least three times as long as part subtended by submarginal
cells (Fig. 137); T1 slightly longer than broad; T5 with apical margin bare, like that of preceding
terga.......... ..............Microsphecodes [##]
- Free part of marginal cell at most twice as long as part subtended by submarginal cells (Fig.
138); T1 usually broader than long; T5 with margin hairier than that of preceding terga ............21()
2l(20). Anterior margin of mesoscutum in profile gently convex, not sharply differentiated from
dorsal surface (Fig. ##); head and thorax hnely punctate; mandibles elongate; free part of
:Tt:l::11 i:::i:t:::::::::::i::::::i:i:i:::,""'*::::ll:l:::#i) ;;;;:;;;;, t##j
- Anterior margin of mesoscutum abruptly declivous, well differentiated from dorsal surface
(Fig. ##); head and thorax usually coarsely pitted, except in small species (less than 6 mm); mandibles not elongate; free part or marginal cell less than twice as long as part subtended by
submarginal cells (Fig. ##) . . . ... ... .^tphecodes l##)
22(14). Mesosoma, especially dorsal and lateral surface propodeum, coarsely areolate; non-
metallic (often black with red metasoma); lower margin clypeus black; head quadrate in frontal
view, clypeus extending just slightly below lower margin of compound eye (Figs. 135, 136 -female
Ptilocleptis and Sphecodes: need male images) (back to key to Sphecodini)..................back to 19
- Mesosoma not coarsely areolate; some u,eakly metallic forms; lower margin clypeus often with
yellow spot; head more elongate in frontal view, clypeus extending well below lower margin of
compound eye (Figs. 157 lParalictusl and 158lEv.vlaeusl); legs often with yellow maculation on
tibia and tarsus ... .,.'.,.,.,...23
157 158
23(22). Terga with apical hair bands; non metallic to weakly metallic..... ... Halicrus l##l
)/,- Terga without apical hair bands; some weakly metallic....
.26-
v
V24(23). Second flagellar segment shorter than or as long as
first [Fig. 155]; S7 with two apodemes on each side,
without apical projection (rare, largely restricted to high
elevation [>l 600m] cloud forests) ...............MexaIictus l41l
- Second flagellar segment longer than first [Fig. 156]; 57
with one apodeme on each side, rvith median apical
projection (common, widespread .......... Lasioglossum (part)
25(l). Females.......155 Ls6
2
I
- Males .....39I
\ \,
\,
\,
Y
\,
\,
v
v
v
\,
\,
v26(25). Proboscis extraordinarily slender, prementum l0 to over 20 times as long as broad (Fig.
67 -ab); proboscidial fossa about as wide as mandibular base (Central America) ........ Megaloptina
- Proboscis not so slender (Fig.67-4a, c-e),prementum four to eight times as long as broad;
proboscidial fossa much wider than mandibular base 27
27(26).lnner hind tibial spur serrate, teeth shorter than wide, pointed or rounded, or margin of
spur undulate or ciliate (Fig. 67-5f, g, k-m) ..........28
- Inner hind tibial spur pectinate, teeth longer than wide (Fig. 67-5h-j, .r) ......... 32
nfg
k
m
h
JI
t 28(27). Scopa absent; integument coarsely punctate (Fig. 176); labral process truncate, without
keel (Fig.65-li) Temnosoma
176
- Scopa present; integument rarely so coarsely punctate; labral process with strong median keel,
usually pointed (Fig. 65-1a, e, g) .. .2965-iv
v
v65-a 6$e
Carynura chilensis65
Augoch loropsi s metalliceP se uda ugoch I on g ra mi n e a
29(28).Inner hind tibial spur ciliate, with slender sharp teeth, as on outer spur, or with short,
nalrow teeth (Fig. 67-5f, g); preoccipital ridge sharply angled or rounded; epistomal suture
forming obtuse paraocular lobe, Fig. 67- 6a) (Panama) ..........Megaloptilla
- Inner hind tibial spur with rounded serrations (Fig. 67-5k-m); preoccipital ridge sharply
angled or carinate. 30
30(29). Epistomal suture forming acute paraocular lobe protruding into clypeus (Fig. 179);
clypeus relatively flat, green almost to apex; anterior angle of hypostomal carina usually a sharp
right angle or produced into spine; apex of marginal cell narrowly truncate and usually
appendiculate (Fig. 1 81) ..Augochloraiil v
v
v
\,
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v- Epistomal suture forming obtuse or right angle laterally (Fig. 180); clypeus beveled, area
below angle not green; anterior angle of hypostomal carina rounded; apex of marginal cell acute
or very narrowly truncate ..............3 1
179
marginal cell
181
31(30). Inner hind tibial spur with few short, rounded teeth, basal tooth largest, forming broadest
part of spur (Fig. 182); basal area of propodeum strongly granular, striate basally; body length
about 5 mm ...........Pereirapis
- Inner hind tibial spur with rounded serrations, basal part broadened and serrate, i.e., not
formed from a single tooth (Fig. 183);basal area of propodeum not strongly granular; body
length usually over 5 mm........... .........Augochlorella
182 r8l I E;l
32(27).Inner hind tibial spur closely pectinate with about ten teeth (Fig. 67-5n; see above)
(basitibial plate defined posteriorly but anterior margin evanescent) ....................Caenaugochlora
(Ctenaugochlora) ],t"1i:
- Inner hind tibial spur with not over six teeth, well-separated.....a'
J180
1JQ
oo \n\o'
0ccllus
v
v
vllllll *1::::::i:l::::::::::::::::: 
:::i*:1i1er'nsa'[e (F'?;,?2"12;i:itf,;r;:;))
- Malar area much shorter than wide; head not greatly elongate (as in Fig. 179).......................34
34(33). Eyes and ocelli enlarged, ocellocular distance thus equal to or less
than ocellar diameter (Fig. l7l); epistomal suture acutely angled laterally,
forming strong paraocular lobe into clypeus (Fig. 67-7d; Fig. 171); mandible
with preapical teeth on inner surface (Fig. 171) except in brood parasitic
fonns with reduced scopa ......... Megolopta
- Eyes and ocelli not enlarged; epistomal suture variously angled, not
forming strong lobe (Fig. 180); mandible without teeth on inner surface....35
t?t
35(34). Tegula with inner posterior angle produced mesally, forming an emargination in the
posterior part of the mesal tegular margin (Fig. 67-5t; Fig. 172); basitibial plate very short,
poorly defined, extending barely past apex of femur (Fig. 67-8a; Fig. 174);Tl andT2 usually
each with an apical marginal series of simple bristles ........ Augochloropsis
- Tegula normal, with posterior end rounded (Fig. 173); basitibial plate not short (Fig. 67-5q, r;
Fig. 175); lacking simple bristes on apical margins of T1 and T2............ ..................36
lcgula
tcgu
-.;A
111 l7i
sn
36Q. Epistomal suture forming right-angular or slightl
Fig. 67-6c), sometimes, as in Andinaugochlora, obtuse
or scarcely obtuse in direct frontal view ........y acute paraocular lobe laterally (as in t*$,le^.r h)
lY: :::? : li::::i*11t::: :::::! rri'
- Epistomal suture forming distinctly obtuse angle laterally (Fig. 67-6a) Neocorynuraa.
I
l.rbnsitihial plate \,
va) c^..J
d C b
Michcner 2()07 Fig. (r7-6a-d
37(36). Basitibial plate well-defined posteriorly, obsolescent anteriorly (Fig. 67-5q); pronotal
dorsolateral angle not produced, obtuse; eye hairs short (rare, Costa Rica)......... .Andinaugochlora
(Andinaugochlora)
- Basitibial plate well-defined on all edges (Fig. 67-5r); pronotal dorsolateral angle frequently
produced, sometimes obtuse; eye hairs frequently long ......... ..................38
trtiohsr :u0l rir. 61-5qr
38(37). Vertex produced to rounded ridge behind ocelli (Fig. 185); preoccipital ridge rounded;
galea of maxilla with apex pointed, well sclerotized; basal elevation of labrum with apical
surface flattened, rimmed (Fig. 65-1b) ............... Pseudaugochlora
- Vertex not produced; preoccipital ridge usually sharply angled or carinate; galea normal, with
apical lobe; basal elevation of labrum without flattened distal surface .................Caenaugochloro
(Caenaugochlora)
39(25). Proboscis extraordinarily slender, prementum l0 to over 20 times as long as broad (Fig.
67 -4b); proboscidial fossa about as wide as mandibular base (Central America) ....... Megaloptina
- Proboscis not so slender, prementum four to eight times as long as broad (Fig.67-4a, c-e);
proboscidial fossa much wider than mandibular base 40alC]?'l i i ll ll *1:: 
::: : i: l::: : : :::: :: :: : :: : : : :i *:::i: 
:l :::T G' 
? el,i !),f"iilit t#i iiilt
- Malar area much shorter than wide; head not greatly elongate ...........41
41(40). Tegula with inner posterior angle produced mesally (Fig. 172); posterior margins of T1
and T2 frequently each with a row of strong simple setae; pronotal dorsal ridge lamellate,
forming flange from lateral angle to lobe ......... Augochloropsis
- Tegula normal, with posterior end rounded (Fig. 173); posterior margins of T1 and T2
without rows of strong setae ......
I8-5
oo
t86 187.42
43v
v
v
v
VC
42(41). 54 with conspicuous apical or median tufts of specialized setae (Fig. 186) or strong
cuticular ridges and depressions ..........
- 54 usually not rnodified, apical margin at most emarginate or with usually hidden posterior
lateral projections.. 45
43(42). Eyes and ocelli enlarged, ocellocular distance usually less than ocellar diameter (Fig.
I 71); 53 bilobed; 54 with posterior margin notched laterally, bilobed medially, and with median
flap, pronotal dorsal ridge rounded and narrow, anterior edge of dorsolateral angle and vertical
ridge below dorsolateral angle both carinate ..... Megalopta
- Eyes and ocelli not enlarged; 53 not strongly bilobed, sometimes medially emarginate; 54 not
as above; pronotal dorsal ridge carinate or lamellate between dorsolateral angle and lobe,
dorsolateral angle not strongly carinate on anterior margin, vertical ridge below dorsolateral
angle variable..... ....44
44(43). Apical flagellar segment tapering, hooked (Fig. 187); preoccipital ridge rounded
Pseudaugochlora
- Apical flagellar segment rounded; preoccipital ridge sharply angled or carinate
......... C aenaugochl ora v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v45(42\. Body very coarsely punctate; T1 to T3 strongly depressed basally (Fig. 176);T7
prolonged apically and bilobed Temnosoma
- Body not very coarsely punctate; Tl to T3 not strongly depressed basally; T7 not prolonged
or bilobed ........46
46(45). Pronotal dorsal ridge lamellate, forming flange from dorsolateral angle to pronotal lobe
(scutum strongly produced over pronotum, usually forming carinate or lamellate flange)(Panama) ...........Megaloptilla
- Pronotal dorsal ridge not lamellate ..................47
47(46). Epistomal suture forming distinctly obtuse lateral angle (as in Fig. 67-6b) .. Neocorynura
- Epistomal suture forming acute or right-angular paraocular lobe laterally (Fig.67-6c, d), the
lobe sometimes, as in Andinaugochlora, obtuse (about 1000) in laterofrontal view but nearly
right-angular in direct frontal view ........ ...............48
48(47). Antenna very long, surpassing propodeum; scape twice length of second flagellar
segment or less; flagellum with plate areas containing only sensory plate-organs, these areas
without setae; 56 strongly notched with deep concavities on either side of median notch (rare,
Costa Rica).. .......... And inau go c lt I or a (And inau go c hl o r a)
- Antenna of moderate length, usually not surpassing propodeum; scape over three times length
of second flagellar segment; flagellum without specialized plate areas (rarely long and with plate
areas in Augochlora); 56 without deep concavities on either side of median notch .....-.-.-.-.-.......49
49(45). Epistomal suture forming acute lateral angle or paraocular lobe protruding into clypeus
(Fig. 179); marginal celltruncate, usually appendiculate (Fig. 181) .......... .Augochlora
- Epistomal suture forming right angle laterally (Fig. 180); marginal cell acute, rarely very
narrowly truncate ...............50
179 180
marginal cell
181 50(49). 54 broadly emarginate posteriorly, laterally bearing long, modified setae that are usually
hidden (Fig. 188); body length about 5 mm; inner lobe of ventral gonostylus without row of
coarse setae ......... .......Pereirapis
-. 54 not broadly emarginate, without long lateral setae (Fig. 189); body length usually over 5
mm; inner lobe of ventral gonostylus bearing marginal row of coarse, flattened
setae.......... .......Augochlorella
SJ
S3
188 189
v
v v
\,
v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,Chapter 9 -- Key to Genera of Eucerini (modified from Dorchin et al.2018)
lupdared 6/3/20221
[If using this key in N. America, start at couplet 2]
1. Forewing with two submarginal cells (Palearctic)
- Forewing with three submarginal cells.................
2(1). Stigma longer than prestigma (as in Michener 2007: frg. ll2-
4c); maxillary palpus short, 2- or 3-segmented; lateral gradular arm
of T6 of female elevated, lamellate, and ended with a spine;
commonly small species, 6.5 - 10 mm long, with appressed tan
metasomal pubescence, without basal tergal hair bands (Neotropical
to Texas)... . MelissoptilaEucera (Eucera s.str.)
2
c
- Stigma as long as or shorter than prestigma (as in Michener
2007: frg. 1L2-4b); maxillary palpus frequently longer, 3 - 6-
segmented; T6 either with or without lateral gradular spine; mostly
larger species, with variable metasomal vestiture ..........3
3(2). Gradulus of 52 of female weakly biconvex, forming an angle of more
than 140'between two convexities (as in Michener 2007 fig.ll2-5a);
pygidial plate of male unrecognizable; labrum long,2l3 - 314 as long as broad;
clypeocular distance long, at least as long as minimum diameter of first
flagellar segment (Neotropical to Northern Mexico). . . ... . .... Thygater
- Gradulus of 52 of female usually more strongly biconvex, forming an angle
of 140" or less between two convexities (as in Michener 2007: fig. 1 12-5b);
pygidial plate of male discemed to various extents; labrum and clypeocular
distance usually shorter...... ........4b
S1
gradulusa
S,I
gradulusb 4(3). Tegula narrowed anteriorly, anterolateral margin
straight or concaved in anterior half or less (as in
Michener 2007: fig. I 12-8a); maxillary palpus usually 4-
segmented, rarely 3-segmented; lateral gradular arm of T7
of male produced into a lateral gradular spine (North and
South America)...........){.rl(..91.(.:{.f..11.& Melissodes
- Tegula almost always with lateral margin convex (as in
Michener 2007: fig. 112-8b); T7 of male usually not
produced into a spine; if tegula narrowed anteriorly (as in
Martinapis) or T7 of male with a lateral gradular spine (as
in Florilegus and Eucera (Xenoglossa) crassidentata
(Cockerell, 1949)) then maxillary palpus 5- or 6-
segmented; maxillary palpus 4 to 6-segmented, rarely 3segmented ....................5
5(4).TZ basal hairband, and sometimes also T3, T4, and
pubescence at scuto-scutellar boundary, with at least a few
plumose and apically spatulate hairs (as in Michener 2007:
fig. 112-10b); maxillary palpus 4- or 5-segmented; lateral
gradular arm of T6 of female elevated, produced into a
::::':::1 "i::ii: ::l:: ("-" 
i::: I ::i ^: "''l?IJ o,,, o
- Spatuloplumose hairs absent on metasomal tergites and
scutellum; maxillary palpus almost always 5- or 6-
segmented; lateral gradular arm of T6 of female with or
without a lateral gradular spine......... ................6
6(5). Female
- Male........
7(6). Basitibial plate with margin entirely exposed and
surface often bare (as in Michener 2007: frg. 112-l2a); T6
with a strong lateral gradular spine; metasomal tergites with
weak iridescent refl ection (Nearctic, Neotropical) ................
Florilegus
- Margin of basitibial plate almost alu,ays partly obscured
by appressed hairs originating on disc (as in Michener
2007: frg. 112-l2b); T6 without lateral gradular spine;
metasomal tergites usually not iridescent ............................ 8btegula
a
T1
T2i ir ,:',11,1,.r:
{ffi$
T4
basitibial
plale
aE v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
\,8(7). Fore coxa with a conspicuous inner apical spine fringed with hairs
(as in Michener 2007: frg. 112-l3c) (Neotropical to Arizona) ... Gaesischia
(in part)
- Fore coxa without spine 9trochanter
spine o{
Iorecoxa
c
9(8). Clypeus with margin indented at anterior tentorial pit to form almost right-angular notch (as
I :' 1 *:l 
3lll_ I 1 1 1 i i I T ::: ii T:: *:" - ::::: ::'H.:X "Ji: i3)::,1 #ff8 t;; ;;;;;
- Clypeus with margin at level of anterior tentorial pits straight or slightly concave (as in*::::::::lll ll |li ]ll} lll::T:::::::ll1:::i:::::'"*Ti::::::::*11llllliia
10(9). Tibial spurs of middle leg short, less than half as long as distance from base of spur to
anterior tibiofemoral articulation; lateral arm of hypostomal carina prominent, sublamelliform;
T2 and T3 with broad basal bands of short white pubescence, contrasting with short, dark,
appressed hairs posteriorly (Baja Califomia, California) ...... Agapanthinus
- Tibial spurs of middle leg long, more than half as long as tibia; lateral arm of hypostomal
carina weak, cariniform; vestiture of T2 and T3 variable, either with or without pale pubescent
bands, or entirely covered by pale pubescence 1l
11(10). Tegula narrowed anteriorly, anterolateral margin concave (as in Michener 2001: ftg.112-
8a); mandible strongly bidentate (but structure lost when the mandible worn), broadened apicallybaca oce
a thus nearly as wide preapically as basally (as in Michener 2007: ftg. ll}-l4b) (Amphitropical
American) ............Martinapis
- Tegula not narrowed anteriorly, anterolateral margin convex (as in Michener 2007: ftg. 112-
8b); mandible rarely bidentate, usually pointed or scarcely notched at apex and much naffower
preapically than basally (as in Michener 2007: ftg.ll2-l4a) ...12
a
l2(ll). Pygidial plate strongly tapering and bluntly pointed apically (as in Fig. 12); clypeus
moderately protuberant, produced in front of anterior tangent of compound eye in profile by 0.5
- 0.8 x eye width (Figs. 10, I l), slightly depressed submedially at each side; scopal hairs
unbranched; keirotrichiate area (ka) small, its greatest width occupying less than half apical
width of tibia (Fig. 1a) .13
10 14 i(i o:gtb
v
v
V
Vb
Ia \,
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v- Pygidial plate broader, frequently rounded apically; if strongly tapering then
either the clypeus flattened or only weakly convex, produced in front of anterior
tangent of compound eye by. 0.5 x eye width (as in Michener 2007: frg. 112-
6b) or the keirotrichiate arealarger, occupying at least half apical width of tibia
(world-wide, except Australia) .Eucera (in part)
b
13(12). Pygidialplate strongly elevated along midline (Fig. l2); maxillary palpus 6-segmented;
clypeus strongly inegularly rugosopunctate (Figs. 7, 8); vertex moderately short, ocelloccipital
distance 3/q to about equal to one lateral ocellar diameter (southwestern deserts of the USA,
Califomia, Baja California) ......... ........ Protohalonia
- Pygidial plate flattened; maxillary palpus 5-segmented; clypeus weakly sculptured, smooth;
vertex short, ocelloccipital distance t/+ - t/t lateral ocellar diameter (deserts of southwestern USA
and Mexico) ................Simanthedon
14(6). Apex of terminal flagellomere pointed, hooked, and twisted slightly laterad (Baja
California, California)........ , Agapanthinus
- Apex of terminal flagellomere rounded, straight............ l5120.5 mm 15(14). 56 without posterolateral converging carinae, with elevated basal or medial convexity or
lamella (as in Michener 2007 fig. 112-10f); medial process of 57 elaborate, with a long curving
arm extended posteriorly way beyond lateral process (as in Michener 2007: ftg. ll2-7i)
16
S6
T7 tooth
median convexity
- 56 with posterolateral carina at each side (as in Fig. 28) often converging with anterior carina;
sometimes only portions of the converging carinae present (as in Dorchin et al.2018: fig. S2b,c),
but median and basal areas unmodified, at most weakly convex, often weakly depressed; medial
process of S7 often simple, at most shortly extending posteriorly beyond lateral process (as in
Dorchin etal.2018: fig. S2h,i,k) .17
v
v
v
v
t/
V
v
/-81-479-1
82-A
g0-1 86-086-0
ol -<
90-2
85- r
k85-285-4tr
I
b.
i. h. v
\,
v
v
\,
v
\,
v
v16(15). T7 with a lateral gradular spine; gonostylus short, robust, broadly
expanded apically (as in Michener 2007: frg. ll2-7 g) (Nearctic,
Neotropical) ............... ...........Florilegus
- T7 without lateral gradular spine; gonostylus long and slender, not or
scarcely expended apically (Neotropical to Arizona)..Gaesischia (in part)
17(15). Hind femur modified, enlarged with area of short, dense hairs near bare undersurface of
posterior margin; flagellum tapering, terminal flagellomere compressed and sometimes expanded
(Neotropical, Arizona)........... . .. ..... Gaesischia (Gaesischiana)
- Hind femur more slender; flagellum usually unmodified, rarely terminal flagellomere
dorsoventrally compressed (as in Eucera (Cemolobus)) 18
18(17). Clypeus apically reflexed, snout-like, forming distinct
preapical angle in profile (as in Michener 2001: fig. 1 12-69); 55
with thick tufts of hairs arising at shallow submedial
emarginations on both sides, oriented posteromedially; hind femur
slender, rounded in cross section (deserts of southwestern USA
and Mexico) .............. Simanthedon
- Clypeus uniformly convex or straight, at most slightly
depressed preapically, then weakly sinuate in profile (as in Eucera
(Cemolobus)); S5 simple, usually without tufts of hairs; hind
femur regularly robust, with lower posterior margin obtusely
carinate, thus bluntly angular in cross section .......... 19g 19(18). 56 with oblique posterolateral carina linear, neither converging with anterior carina or
ridge (as in Fig. 28) nor joined with anterolateral branch carina reflecting an anterolateral angle
or lobe; medial process of 57 elaborate, with a long curving arm extended posteriorly way
beyond lateral process and produced apically into a broad ventrally setose plate (as in Figs. 29-
3l); antennae moderately short, 3 - 3.6 x as long as compound eye .......20
- 56 variable: oblique posterolateral carina often converging with, or accompanied by anterior
carina, and curved basad anteriorly (as in Dorchin et al. 2018: fig. S2b) or curved outward,
thickened basally, and joined with a lateral branch carina reflecting an anterolateral angle or lobe
(as in Dorchin et al.2018: fig. S2c), although sornetimes the converging carinae almost
completely absent but a lateral branch is present (as in Dorchin et aL.2018: fig. S2d); medial
process of S7 usually simple, at most extending slightly posteriorly beyond lateral process (as in
Dorchin et al.2018: fig. S2h,i,k); antennae short to long, often more than 3.6 x as long as
compound eye (worldwide, except Australia) ..Eucera (in part)
V81.5
B1 -4
90-18G-0
s4-1 87-488-0
87-5g0-1
91 91 -586-C
90-2
85-285-430
81-'.l
7S-0JI
b. c.d.
k. i. h.85-1 \,
v
\,
\,
v
\,
v
v
\,
\,20(19). Pygidial plate narrow with an elevated longitudinal ridge, and apically rounded (Figs. 26,
27); spine of front tibial spur shorter than velum bearing shaft; gonostylus simple, uniformly
covered with sparse setae (Figs . 33,34); S8 dorsally pubescent (Fig. 32) (southwestern deserts of
USA, California; Mexico, Baja California) ......... . Protohalonia
0.5 mm 0.5 mm
JJ0.25 mn
- Pygidial plate broad, flattened, and apically truncate; spine of front tibial spur longer than
velum bearing shaft; gonostylus elaborate with a broad anterior lobe completely obscured by
dense setae, and with attenuate posterior lobe; S8 hairless except for a few isolated hairs on
apical margin (as in Dorchin et aL.2018: fig. S2m) (Amphitropical American) .............Martinapis
95-0
97-1
94-1
93-00.25 mm
96-227 An't\iJt'nr
Chapter 10 -- Key to Genera of laeripnini (modified from Michener 2007;p.495-a97)
lupdared 6/24/20221
l. Mandible of female with five or more tr;eth separated by acute notches (Fig. 3 7l ); with the
following combination of other characters: arolia absent; basal vein of forewing several vein
widths basal to cu-v; base of propodeal triangle minutely roughened, punctate, hairy,without
v
v
V
Y
V
V
Vseries of pits; postspiracular fovea of propodeum absent;
! o1 naorc \'\ \t\h- krhcarina absent(J. :r.9)..,2
377
-. Mandible of female with three or four (rarely five) teeth, at least some of them separated by
obtuse or rounded emarginations (Fig. 37|2), rarely distal margin edentate except for small tooth
near lower margin (Fig. 375); without the combination of other characters listed above...............3
372
preapical notch
2(1). Pronotal lobe with anterior lamellate ridge; male with projecting lateral combs on 55 and
patch of long, wavy setae on 53; mandible of female with five teeth and femur of foreleg with
conical base..
P s eudo anthidium nanum l##)
-. Pronotal lobe without anterior lamellate ridge; if with lamellate ridge (only in Anthidium
oblongatum), then male without projecting lateral combs on 55 and female mandible with at
least 9 teeth . .... Anthidium l##lJ.1) v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
\,3(2). Middle tibia with two apical spines (Fig. 362) (for small specimens with abundant hairs,
examine in distal view); scopa absent....... Srelis l##l
l6t
rrdtibin
-. Middle tibia with one apical spine, or spine reduced to a sharp angle or rounded margin
(Figs. 363, 383, 384); scopa present (except rn Hoplostel,s)............ ......-...4
363383384
4(3). Propodeum with fovea delimited posteriorly by a carina behind spiracle (Fig. 385); omaular
carina present; base of propodeum frequently with row of pits across upper margin connecting
postspiracular foveae (Fig. 385), but sometimes row present only laterally 5
J85 loo Ls nara lrYa i
T_:,_i@.1',:::;: beh,ae,
?i* qn< lrlcc
dteT 'er5to4
fovca
Q ryqulal Cnlr4a -spiraclt:
Ftoa,31o'1" ctnllc-' -. Propodeum without fovea behind spiracle (or, in Notanthidium, fovea sometimes present);
omaular carina absent or weak [or, in Rhynostelis, lamellate]; row of pits across upper margin of
propodeum absent, weak, or present only laterally ...............14
.6
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v5(4). Apex of middle tibia without tibial spine or angular vestige of spine, but with convex carina
(with dense short hairs beneath) across tibial apex, curving basad anteriorly, forming edge of
broad, scoop-shaped concavity on apical tibial surface (Fig. 383); apical margin of mandible of
female strongly oblique, about half as long as mandible Q.Iorth and Central America)
-......-.Paranrhidium (in part) [##]
-. Apex of middle tibia with angle or short spine on outer side, without preapical concavity
(Fig. 38a); apical margin of mandible of female usually less oblique and often less than half as
long as mandible
6(5). Subantennal suture long and distinctly arcuate outward (Fig. 382);preoccipital ridge behind
vertex strongly carinate and produced posteriad, covering pronotum; scutellum ending as sharply
margined truncation (with small median emargination) overhanging metanotum and propodeum
(Figs. 378,379) (North and Central America) Anthidiellum l##l
378
382
scutellum
subantennal surure
379
-. Subantennal suture more or less straight (Fig. 376) (or, in some Hypanthidiodes, arcuate
although rather short); preoccipital ridge behind vertex not or moderately carinate, not produced
posteriad; scutellum not truncate(Fig. 380, 381), or, if so, then sharply margined only laterally v
v
\,
\,
v
\,
\,
\,
\,
v
\,oc 380o
376
scutcllum
381
7(6). Juxtantennal carina present, sometimes a low and elongate, curved ridge rather than a sharp
carina, always extending downward as well as upward from level of middle of antennal socket
(Fig.376; indicated by arrow) [a welt immediately mesal to antennal base, as in Dianthidium
(D.) marshi Grigarick and Stange and some species of D. (Adanthidium), is not considered a
juxtantennal carina] 8
-. Juxtantennal carina absent or, if present (as in Epanthidium), then arising abruptly at
innermost margin of antennal socket and extending only upward ............12
8(7). Preoccipital carina strong laterally, behind eye, and extending down to join posterior end of
hypostomal carina; scutoscutellar suture open to form two strong foveae with smooth bottoms,
each five times as long as broad or less (Fig. 388) (arolia present in both sexes) (neotropical) .......
Anthodioctes l##l
388 389()
-. Preoccipital carina absent, or, if present, then not approaching hypostomal carina;
scutoscutellar suture usually narrower, but if with two foveae, then each usually more than five
times as long as broad (Fig. 389) ...........9
9(8). Stigma small, its width about equal to its length as measured on costal margin; 55 and 56 of
male both without lateral tooth or lobe; T6 of male produced posteriorly to large rounded lobe at
each side, with broad emargination and sometimes median spine between lobes;preoccipital
carina sometimes present behind upper two thirds of eye (Central and South America),3OOoC i. li,, Duckeanrhidium l##l
-. Stigma larger, its width less than its length on costal margin; 55 and 56 of male each with
lateral tooth or small lobe; T6 of male without widely separated lateral lobes; preoccipital carina
absent. ...............10
10(9). Scopa absent; T7 of male small, not or scarcely bilobed (arolia present in both sexes)
(neotropical) l1
-. Scopa present; T7 of male distinctly bilobed or with two apicolateral projections separated by
straight or concave margin (Fig. 377) (neotropical) ............... ...... Hypanthidioides l##)
377
11(10). Base of female mandible without protuberance; mandible of female unmodified,4-
toothed like that of Hypanthidioides; body somewhat elongate, as in Hypanthidioides
..Austrostelis l##l
-. Female mandible with strong protuberance near anterior articulation; mandible of female
with fourth (uppermost) tooth shifted basad, nearer to base of mandible than to apex, or absent;
body robust, metasoma sometimes almost globose ..........-.-Hoplostelis l##l
l2(7). Anterior margin of scutum abruptly declivous, steeply sloping or vertical, in contrast to
dorsal surface (Fig. 373); posterior margin of metanotum, lateral to metanotal pit, with area or
strip of short, white hairs (rarely absent); mandible of female three-toothed, sometimes modified
by fusion of upper two teeth to form long, nearly straight, untoothed margin (Fig. 375) (nearctic,
Mexico)... Dianrhidiunt l##lv
Y
v
v
v v
v
v
V
V373 371
-. Anterior margin of scutum with surface a continuation of curvature of dorsal surface or at
least not deviating from that curvature by more than 45o (Fig.37q metanotum without area or
strip of distinctive short hairs; mandible of fernale four-toothed (teeth sometimes low or badly
worn; mandibles often must be open to evaluate this character) ............ .....................13
13(12). Arolia absent (Fig. 367); pronotal lobe with
strong carina or rarely with short lamella; juxtantennal
carina absent (neotropical)............... . Hypanthidium l##l
-. Arolia present in males and most females (Fig. 368);
pronotal lobe with high lamella (as in Figs. 380, 381);
juxtantennal carina present, arising on inner margin of
antennal socket and extending upward, not at all
downward, or, if virtually absent, then often showing
origin on inner margin of antennal socket (neotropical)..
Epanrhidium l##l367 368
hain
arolium
14(4). Omaulus lamellate;Tuxtantennal carina present (as in Fig.376); base of mandible of
female with protuberance near anterior articulation; clypeus of female with basal median
projection; scopa absent (South America) ..-.... Rhynostelis l##l
-. Omaulus rounded or weakly carinate; base of mandible and of clypeus of female unmodified;
scopa present...... ................15
15(14). Apex of middle tibia without angular tibial spine, but with strongly convex carina across
posterior part of tibial apex, the carina (beneath which are dense, short hairs) curving basad
anteriorly, forming apex of gentle concavity in tibial surface, at least in females (Fig.362?);
apical margin of female mandible strongly oblique, about half as long as mandible (North and
Central America)... .........Paranthidium (in part) [##]
-. Apex of middle tibia with angle or short spine on outer side, without preapical concavity;
apical margin of female mandible less oblique, usually less than half as long as mandible.........l6 16(15). T6 of fernale [Fig.386] and T5-T6 of male [Fi-s.387] with strong lateral teeth; T7 of
male strongly bilobed [Fig. 387] (Mexico)... Aztecanthidium 164l
387 386
T5
-- T6 of female and T5-T6 of male without lateral teeth; T7 of male not strongly bilobed
Trachusa (parl lalT5
T6 v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
vChapter 11 - Key to the Families of North and Central America
lupdated 7/6/2022)
a. First two segments of labial palpus long, flattened, and sheathlike fFigs. 6 and 414]; remaining
two segments small, short, often directed laterad, not sheathlike, rarely absent or third flat and
not directed laterad; volsella absent or greatly reduced, rarely distinct
- First two segments of labial palpus not flattened and sheathlike, similar in form to third and
fourth segments, or sometimes first segment much elongated and somewhat sheathlike [Figs. 8
and 416); volsella usually well developed [Fig. 20]
b(a). Labrum longer than broad, at base widened to broad articulation with clypeus [Fig. 357];
scopa, when present, on metasomal sterna [Fig. 23];two submarginal cells, usually about equal
in length [Fig. 53] .............. Megachilidae
- Labrum broader than long [Fig. 356] or, if longer than broad, then narrowed basally to short
articulation with clypeus [Fig. 317]; scopa, when present, on hind legs (principally the tibia);
usually three submarginal cells [Fig. 52]; if two submarginal cells, often with first much longer
than second or veins weakened; sometimes only one submarginal cell ......... ..... Apidae
cardo
stipcsgrlca
4llpalpus
palpus stiPes
paraglossa
labial palpus
premenlum
414415
c(a). Glossa broadly subtruncate, emarginate, or bilobed [Fig. 8]cardo
stipes
+t-)
hairs oflar.inia
premcntum
416cardil
Colletidae
- Glossa pointed fFigs. 6 and 416) .. .d d(c). Lacinia a scalelike lobe with hairs, near base of galea [Fig. al l]; mentum and lorum
together forming a lobe projecting behind labiomaxillary tube (: basal part of proboscis) [as in
Fig. 4l ]; lorum at least partly sclerotized and having shape other than mere sclerotization of
nearly flat membrane [Figs. 8 and 415] e
- Lacinia inconspicuous or displaced, not easily identifiable fFigs. 412 and 413]; mentum and
lorum not forming a lobe projecting behind labiomaxillary tube [Fig. al6]; mentum membranous
or membrane partly sclerotized; lorum largely membranous or membrane largely sclerotized but
flat, occupying space between cardines ..f
e(d). Facial fovea present in females and some males [Fig. 1 l1]; almost always two subantennal
sutures on each side [Fig. lll, 399, and 400]; lorum more or less platelike but produced
posteriorly in middle for reception of mentum [Fig. 8] ............. ........Andrenidae (part)
- Facial fovea absent [Fig. 158]; one subantennal suture [Figs. 157 and 158]; lorum slender,
V-shaped or Y-shaped fas in Fig. 415] .... Melittidae
f(d). Lacinia small hairless sclerite near base of galea but hidden between expanded stipites [Fig.
413]; stigma virtually absent [Fig. 192]; first flagellar segment as long as scape; two subantennal
sutures on each side [Figs. 711,399, and 400] ........ Andrenidae (Oxaeinae)
- Lacinia disassociated from rest of maxilla, represented by small hairy lobe on anterior face of
labiomaxillary tube lFig. al2l; stigrna well developed [Fig. 181]; first flagellar segment much
shorterthan scape; one subantennal suture on each side fFigs. 157 and 158]..................Halictidae v
v
v
v
v
v
Y v
v
\,
\,
v
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,Chapter 12 -- Notes on the genera
lupdated 07/08/22 BND JLN
The notes below are intended to supplement the keys in that they should help the user decide
whether they have successfully identified a specimen to genus. The notes are organized
according to the classification of bee genera presented in Table 2-1. The brief family
characterizations, as well as the "Key to the Families," are probably accurate for our area but not
necessarily worldwide. For a worldwide treatment of genera, see Michener (2007).
DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. For each genus, there are comments on appearance and sometimes on
distinguishing features other than those noted in the keys. General body shape is described in
terms (listed below) such that with a single word a person who knows a few common bee genera
can get an idea of what an unknown genus looks like. Body forms are best appreciated in dorsal
view. Additional comments on color and pilosity are added to the descriptions below, where
useful.
andreniform-body form of Andrena [Figs. 421-424], Halictus fFigs. 439 and 440), or Colletes
[Fig. al7]. Male often more slender, with more parallel-sided metasoma, than female.
anthophoriform-body form of Anthophora lFrgs.473 and 4741. Robust, with head and
mesosoma hairy, enhancing the aspect of robustness; metasoma beyond first segment usually
with little erect hair.
apiform-body form of workers of Apis mellifera [Fig. 507]. That is, more robust than
andreniform and more slender than euceriform.
bombiform-body form of Bombus fFigs 508 and 5091. Like anthophoriform but metasoma
with much erect hair, like mesosoma.
epeoliform-body form of Epeolus or Triepeolus [Fig. a93]. Somewhat more robust than
Nomada but nonetheless wasplike parasitic bees; scopa absent; body often with areas of short,
pale pubescence forming a conspicuous pattern.
euceriform-body form of Melissodes fFigs. 481 and 482]. Similar to anthophoriform but
somewhat less robust.
heriadiform-body form of Hoplitis fFig. 471), Heriades [Figs. 469 and 470f, or Megachile
(Chelostomoides) [Fig. a65]. Similar to megachiliform but more slender, metasoma parallel
sided.
hylaeiform-body form of l/ylaeus lFig.420]. Slender, hairs inconspicuous without
magnification, scopa inconspicuous or absent.
megachiliform-body form of Megachile (Megachile) fFigs. 463 and 464), Osmia [Fig. 472], or
Dianthidiun lFig.457l.Heavy body, thick head, metasoma rather wide, not parallel sided. nomadiform-body form of Nomada [Figs. 498 and 499]. Slender, wasplike, not noticeably
hairy, often with yellow or red markings or entirely red or yellow; scopa absent.
trigoniform-body form of Trigona [Fig. 519] and its relatives. Metasoma small or slender;
body not conspicuously hairy, that is, hairs short and metasoma usually shiny.
Many bees do not fall unequivocally into one of the above categories. Much of a
specimen's appearance depends on how full the crop was when the specimen was killed, how
much the metasoma has telescoped in drying, and so forth. Nonetheless, we think that these
terms may be useful to give an idea of the characteristic aspect of a genus.
CONTENT OF THE NOTES. The notes and keys give characteristics of species within our area,
which is America north of the Colombia-Panama border, including the Antilles (i.e., North
America). Extralimital species may not agree with all characters listed. Under each family,taxa
are aranged according to Table 2-1, which provides a complete classification at the family,
subfamily, tribal, and generic levels. For more detailed information on each genus as well as
additional taxonomic notes on the subgenera, see Michener (2007).
In most bees the integument is black. If it is extensively colored otherwise (e.g., red,
yellow, or metallic blue or green), it is noted. Hairiness, when mentioned, refers to long hairs,
giving a more robust and fuzzy aspect, unless otherwise indicated.
For each genus, after listing some morphological characteristics, the notes give a
subjective idea of abundance, based on collecting experience. In Table 2-l we provide an
estimate of the number of species in our area (Canada, United States, Mexico, Guatemala,
Belize, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, and the Greater and Lesser
Antilles) based on information provided in Ascher and Pickering2020 (Discover Life:
irttps:i,irvu'*'.discoverlife.orgimpr'20q?search:Apoidea lnote vet sion and date in final draftl).
Next, the notes indicate the range (and sometimes habitat) of the genus within our area,
including a rough indication of the more extensive neotropical range, if applicable, followed by a
parenthetical notation if the range is more extensive-for example, holarctic or cosmopolitan.
The word Mesoamerica as used here means Mexico and Central America, including Panama.
The word tropical is frequently used and refers to lowland areas, usually moist or mesic, in
Mesoamerica. Additional details on the biogeography of each genus can be found in Michener
(2007).
Most bees are solitary, that is, with one female per nest, and the nests are burrows in the
ground made by the bees (Danforth et al.2019} Sometimes nests occur in large and dense
aggregations, but the bees are nonetheless considered solitary. Notation is made of genera that
include some species or populations that are social, either cooperatively breeding or eusocial (as
defined in Danforth et al. 2019) or that nest in different sites or substrates. Nests are unknown for
certain genera. A review of known immature stages was made by McGinley (1989) but larval
bees from additional genera have since been described by Rozen and others.
Many groups of solitary bees are host-plant specialists (also referred to as "oligolectic"
bees), meaning they visit a small group of closely related host-plants for pollen. For these
specialist groups we list the likely host-plant genera and families upon which they specialize. For
"oil bees", bees that collect floral oils for brood cell lining and pollen provisions, we also list the
floral hosts that serve as a source for the oils as well as morphological modifications associated
with oil collecting.v
V
v
v
v v
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
vBrood parasites, also called cuckoo bees or cleptoparasites, have no pollen-harvesting or
pollen-carrying structures. Brood parasites enter nests of their hosts, lay eggs in the host cells,
and leave (Danforth et aL.2019). In most cases, brood parasitic females oviposit in open cells
but, in some genera, females open previously closed cells. Adults or larvae of the brood parasite
kill the host egg or larva and the brood parasitic larva consumes the pollen-nectar provisions
collected by the host bee. Approximately 13o/o of currently described bee species are brood
parasites (Danforth et al.2019). Nearly all brood parasitic genera have a narrow, well-defined
host range. We indicate in the notes below the presumed host range of each of the brood parasitic
genera. In social parasites, females remain in the nests of their social hosts and become, in effect,
members of the colony. Social parasites are known within the genera Bombus (subgenus
Psithyrus) and Lasioglossum (some species of the subgenus Dialictus; parasitic species were
formerly placed in the subgenus Paralictus).
Interested readers should refer to Michener (2007) for the subgeneric classification of
each genus and relevant keys to subgenera, often organized by geographic region. Keep in mind
that subgeneric classifications are generally less stable than the generic classification we have
used here and that changes may have been made to the subgeneric classification of certain genera
following the publication of Michener (2007). For example, Lasioglossum (Gibbs et al. 2013)
and Hoplitrs (Sediry et al. 2013) have both undergone taxonomic revisions that impact the
subgeneric groupings currently recognized. In such cases, we have indicated this in the entries
below. For genera whose subgenera are often given generic status, such as Lasioglossum, we
give keys to subgenera, or when there are only two such subgenera in our area, we give
di stinguishing characters.
Under "Revision(s)" we list reviews, keys, and so forth, as well as full revisions;
sometimes we give a reference to a relevant work even if it lacks keys to species. To avoid
repetition, the major faunal work (Mitchell 1960, 1962), which includes keys to species as well
as descriptions of the species found east of the Mississippi River (i.e., eastern USA and Canada),
is not cited under each genus; however, that work contains a "revision" of each genus for that
area. For many genera in the eastem USA, Discover Life (https://www.discoverlife.org) has
online keys to species that we highly recommend. However, for some genera (e.g.,
Lasioglossum) these keys may be incomplete, especially for areas west of the Mississippi River
or south of the US-Mexican border. Additional keys for groups which include non-native species
can be found here: https:i'r'idtools.orgi'idibeesiexotic:index.php. Finally, in parentheses, we show
the couplet or couplets to which the genus runs in the keys.
Synonymous names exist for many genera. We list those names that have been in recent
use and that might cause confusion.
Family Andrenidae
Glossa short to long, pointed, with or without flabellum. Labial palpus with segments usually
similar, but some species with elongate mouthparts may have greatly elongated labial and
maxillary palpi (for example, Andrena micheneriana LaBerge, Calliopsis zonalis Cresson), and
Perdita hurdi Timberlake). Mentum membranous or sclerotrzed; lorum scoop shaped, or Y
shaped with arms not as slender as in long tongued bees; mentum and lorum forming a lobe that
projects behind proboscis when proboscis is folded. Usually with paired subantennal sulci but
single in males of some species of Protandrena and sometimes difficult to see in strongly sculptured species. Facial fovea present in Andreninae (females) and Panurginae (females and
many males) but absent in Oxaeinae, conspicuously hairy in Andreninae but appearing smooth in
Panurginae.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. All andrenids are
solitary (or communal), ground-nesting bees. None are brood parasites. Many species are
univoltine with a narrow window of adult activity. Nearly all panurgines, many andrenines, but
probably no oxaeines are oligolectic. All andrenines and oxaeines transport pollen dry but all
panurgines are agglutinators, either initially loading pollen dry onto the hind tibia then adding an
outer layer moistened with nectar (most species) or using nectar to glue all pollen to the sparsely
hairy hind tibia (e.g. many Perdita; see Portman et al. l20l9l for a review of pollen transport in
bees). Vibratile pollen collection is rare in the Andreninae and Panurginae but apparently
universal among the Oxaeinae. The largest genera are Andrena and Perdita. A recent
phylogenetic study by Bossert et al. (2021) provides a stable subfamilial and tribal classification
for this family, which we have followed here.
Andreninae
I . Ancylandrenu Cockerell: Similar to large, hairy, robust, nonmetalli c Andrena; flocculus of
female hind trochanter entirely absent. Medium to large bees (8-15 mm). Rare. Xeric parts of
southern California to New Mexico, Baja California, and Sonora. Most Ancylandrena species are
specialists on legumes (Fabaceae) . A. larreae is a specialist on Larrea (Zygophyllaceae).
Revi sion : Zav ortrnk (1 97 4). (couplets 44 i and 47 6 )
2. Andreno Fabricius: Black or dull metallic blue or green, moderately hairy, andreniform [Figs.
421-4241; females with distinctive velvety facial foveae; sometimes with metasoma red, terga
frequently with hair bands; propodeal scopa often well-developed; flocculus of female hind
trochanter often well-developed; face sometimes with yellow marks, especially clypeus of males.
Mostly medium sized bees but ranging from 6 to 16 mm. Common; over 500 species in our area,
many locally abundant. Many species are oligolectic. Common host-plant families in North
America include Asteraceae, Brassicaceae, Cornaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Ericaceae, Fabaceae,
Hydrophyllaceae, Malvaceae, Onagraceae, Portulacaceae, Salicaceae and Solanaceae (Larkin et
al. 2008). Primarily Holarctic plus Africa. In North America common in temperate regions south
to the Mexican plateau and beyond; rare in tropics south to Panama. Keys to the subgenera:
LaBerge (1964,1986), Michener, 2007. Revisions by subgenus (see titles of papers in Literature
cited): Bouseman and LaBerge (1979); Donovan (1977); LaBerge (1967,1969,197la,b,1973,
1977, 1980, 1986, 1987, 1989b); LaBerge and Bouseman (1970); LaBerge and Ribble (1972,
1975); LaBerge and Thorp, (2005); Linsley etal. (1973); Ribble (1967,1968a,b, 1974); Thorp
(i969); Thorp and LaBerge, (2005). Dubitzky et al. (2010) provides a phylogenetic analysis of
Andrena based on morphology. A recent phylogenetic study by Pisanty et aL. (2021) indicates
that many of the currently recognized subgenera are paraphyletic, however the keys and
revisions mentioned above are still useful for species identifications (couplets 45 Q, 47 3, and
1e3)v
\,
v
v
v
v v
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
\,
\,
vThe great majority of species have three submarginal cells (couplets 45 and 47) but two
subgenera (Parandrena and Diandrena) and scattered species in other subgenera have only two
submarginal cells (couplet 193).
3. Megondrena Cockerell: Similar to large nonmetallic Andrena with apical metasomal hair
bands; metasoma sometimes red. Large bees (12-16 mm). Rare; deserts of Nevada, Arizona,
southern Califomia, and probably northwestern Mexico. One species, M. mentzeliae, is a
specialist on Mentzelia (Loasaceae) (Zavorlink 1972) and the other, M. enceliae, is thought to be
a specialist on Larcea (Zygophyllaceae) (Michener 2007). See Zavortink (1972) for additional
notes on the biology. (couplets 45! and 46,$.
Oxaeinae
Oxaeines are large, fast-flying bees. Common features include a greatly reduced stigma,
elongate, slender marginal cell, and strongly protuberant clypeus; males have holoptic eyes that
converge strongly above. Due to their distinctive morphology and biology, oxaeines were
considered a separate family (Oxaeidae) in the past. For a recent generic and subgeneric revision
of Oxaeinae, see Engel (2015). For a revision of North American species see Hurd & Linsley
(1e16).
4. Mesoxsea Hurd and Linsley: Large to very large (13-24 mm), hairy, apiform or euceriform;
head and mesosoma black, terga sometimes feebly metallic, without colored bands. Uncommon.
Ranges from Chiapas, Mexico, to Louisiana, Texas, and southem Arizona, USA, but largely
absent from the Mexican plateau. Distinguished from Protoxaea by the deeply emarginate apex
of S8 (in males) and the conspicuous lateral tufts of long white hair on T5 (female) and T6
(male). Revision: Hurd and Linsley (1976).
5. Oxuea Klug: Large to very large (19-26 mm), hairy, apiform or euceriform, with metasomal
terga or bands on terga bright green. The only other large bees with green bands are some species
of Nomia;the bands in Nomia are not brilliant metallic but rather pearly, and Nomia has a
distinct stigma. Rare. Lowland tropics from southem Brazil to Veracruz, Mexico. Revision:
None, but see Hurd and Linsley (1976). (couplet 94)
6. Protoxuea Cockerell and Porter: Large (14-22 mm), hairy, apiform or euceriform fFigs. 430
and 431] head and mesosoma black, terga weakly metallic, without colored bands, uncommon
but sometimes locally abundant; occurs from Puebla, Morelos, and Guerrero, Mexico, north to
Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, USA. Distinguished from Mesoxaea based on the shape of the
male S8 (entire, not emarginate) and the less developed lateral tufts of hair on T5 (in females)
and T6 (in males), which are rather brown-yellow and not white. Revision: Hurd and Linsley
(1e76).
Panurginae : Calliopsini 7. Calliopsis Smith: Mainly small (4-12 mm) andreniform bees [Figs. 425 and 426], usually
with either yellow integumental tergal bands or hair bands; mesosoma and metasoma dorso-
ventrally flattened, metasoma occasionally red; face usually with yellow or white markings; male
genitalia with greatly enlarged penis valves and with gonostyli absent or essentially so (no other
bees in our area have genitalia of this style). Moderately common, especially in westem USA.
Southem Canada, throughout U.S.A. and Mexico to Central and South America. Widespread in
temperate areas but most common in warm, xeric areas. Nearly all species are oligolectic, most
commonly on Asteraceae, Euphorbiaceae or Fabaceae, but also on Boraginaceae, Brassicaceae,
Capparidaceae, Lamiaceae, Malvaceae, Papaveraceae, Rosaceae, Solanaceae, Verbenaceae or
Zygophyllaceae. Our species previously split into three genera: Calliopsrs (with Calliopsima,
Perissander and Verbenapis); Nomadopsis (with Micronomadopsis); and Hypomacrotero.
Michener 2007 (p.309) provides a key to the subgenera. Revisions: Rozen (1958) for the
subgenera Macronomadopsis Rozen, Micronomadopsis Rozen, and Nomadopsrs Ashmead;
Shinn (1967) for the subgenera Calliopsima Shinn, Calliopsis Smith s.str., Perrs sander
Michener, and Verbenapis Cockerell and Atkins; Danforth (1994) for the subgenus
Hypomacrotera Cockerell and Porter. (couplet 228).
Panurginae: Panurgini
8. Panurginzs Nylander (:Greeleyello Cockerell): Small, slender, black, andreniform, sparsely
hairy, the male almost hylaeiform and often with yellow clypeus. Easily recognized among
North American panurgines by first recurrent vein meeting first transverse cubital. Uncommon in
western North America, rare in east (with just three species east of the Mississippi); southern
Canada, USA, and northern Mexico. Floral host preferences poorly known. Some species are
polylectic but others oligolectic on Limnanthaceae, Malvaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rhamnaceae or
Rosaceae. Recent phylogenetic studies suggest the New World Panurginu.r may be generically
distinct from the Old World species, in which case the genus for the New World species will
become Greeleyella Cockerell. Revisions: Crawford (1926);Michener (1935), one group of
species. (couplet229)
Panurginae: Perditini
A short, truncate marginal cell is characteristic of most Perditini (see couplet 173 and Fig. 306)
and is unique among nonparasitic bees (but note that in some Macrotera, the marginal cell
resembles that of some Protandrena fHeterosarus)). Macrotera and Pseudomacrotera were
previously included in Perdita.
9. Macrotera Smith: Very small to medium, but mainly small (3-10 mm); andreniform; black
with reddish metasoma in most species; non-metallic. Locally common; distributed from North
Dakota, southward and westward through Utah, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and
southern California to Puebla, Mexico. Males in Macrotera show extreme head allometry such
that larger males have massively expanded, quadrate heads. Some species exhibit male
dimorphism: small, flighrcapable males can be collected on flowers, but flightless, large-headedv
V
v
v
v
v v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
vmales are only found within the nest (Danforth 1991). Macrotera was originally treated as part of
Perdita but phylogenetic studies based on morphology (Danforth 1996) suggested that they
constitute a distinct group sister to Perdita sensu stricto. Macrotera (including the subgenera
Cockerellula, Macrotera, Macroteropsis and Macroterella) was elevated to generic level by
Michener (2007). Many species oligolectic on either Malvaceae or Cactaceae. Revision:
Danforth (1996).
10. Perdita Smith: Very small to medium (2-9 mm) but mainly small; andreniform [Figs. 428
and 4291; black to metallic blue or green, commonly with extensive yellow or white markings,
metasoma or whole body sometimes entirely yellow, red, or white Widespread in temperate
region, particularly in plains and deserts, uncommon in humid regions. An enormous group of
over 630 described species. Southem Canada to Costa Rica. Most abundant and diverse in
southwestern US and northern Mexico, absent in Caribbean except one species from Hispaniola
(Ascher and Engel, 2012). Nearly all species are oligolectic, involving many different plant
families including (in rank order of importance) Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Polygonaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Boraginaceae, Loasaceae, Hydrophyllaceae, Solanaceae , Zygophyllaceae, and
Brassicaceae. Revisions: Timberlake (1954, 1956, 1958, 1960, 1962,1964, 1968, 1971, 1980b);
Griswold and Miller (2010), subgenus Xerophasma; Portman etal. (2016), Heteroperdita;
Portman and Griswold (2017), Procockerellia; Griswold and Parker (1988), Mentzelia group.
(couplets 9l and 174)
The vast majority of species have two submarginal cells and therefore run to 174 in the key; but
some species of subgenus Procockerellia and all species of subgenus Xerophasma have a small
intercalary cell and thus three submarginal cells. They come out at couplet 91.
ll. Pseudomacrotera Timberlake: Small (6-8 mm); andreniform; dark thorax and dark reddish
abdomen similar to the larger members of the genus Macrotera (length 5-7.5mm). Head and
thorax tinged with subtle dark metallic blue or green, unlike those of Macrotera. 56 of the male
is inflated and protruding. Males exhibit enornous variation in head size, as in Macrotera. The
single species (Pseudomacrotera turgiceps (Timberlake)) occurs in the deserts of the
southwestern US (Arizona, California, Nevada and Utah, USA) and Baja California, Mexico.
Specimens have been collected on diverse plant families in southern California. This group was
originally included in Perdita but recent phylogenetic studies (Bossert et al.2021) indicate that
Pseudomacrotero is a distinct lineage. (couplet ##)
Panurginae: Protandrenini
12. Protandrens Cockerell: Small to medium (4-12 mm), andreniform, usually black but
sometimes red, metallic blue or mesosoma or metasoma maculate; males, and sometimes
females, usually with extensive facial maculae. Most with two submarginal cells but three in
Protandrena s. str. Some males in subgenera Heterosarus and Pterosarus lack the usual andrenid
outer subantennal sulcus. Widespread in temperate areas, occurring from southern Canada to
Panama, most abundant and diverse in arid regions of southwestem USA and northern Mexico,
but rare in humid tropics. As currently defined, Protandrena is a strictly North American group. Currently absent from the Caribbean but represented by a Miocene fossil from the Dominican
Republic (Rozen 1996). Many species are oligolectic with all species of Pterosarers and
Pseudopanurgus s. str. oligolectic on Asteraceae, and the lone species of Anthemurgus and
Metapsaenythia oligolectic on Passifloraceae and Lamiaceae, respectively. Some Heterosarus
are oligolectic on Asteraceae Euphorbiaceae, Rhamnaceae or Rubiaceae, but floral hosts are
unkrown for most species. Similarly, some Protandrena s. str. are polylectic while a few are
oligolectic on Amaranthaceae, Asteraceae, Euphorbiaceae, or Lamiaceae but floral hosts are
unknown for most species. Some of the polylectic species are vibratile pollen collectors.
Previously usually treated either as two genera; with Protandrena for the North American
protandrenines with three submarginals (yius Metapsaenythia) and Pseudopanurgus for the
remaining North American protandrenines with two submarginal cells (Mitchell 1960) or
alternatively as an expanded Protandrena including all the North American protandrenines
except Anthemurgus and Pseudopanurgus s. str. (Michener 2007). Revisions: Michener (1952),
Ruz (1990), Timberlake (1967, 1969, 1973, 1975, 1976).
Key to the subgenera of Protundrena (111912022; provided by Jack and Silas)
a. Three submarginal cells... .Protandrena s. str
- Two submarginal cells b
b(a). Base of propodeal triangle (metapostnotum) hairy, at least laterally ....
- Base of propodeal triangle (metapostnotum) glabrous ..d
v
v
v
v
V
v
v
V
Yc(b). Glossa short, about half as long as prementum; length of first segment of labial palpus less
than half sum of segments Z-4;metasoma black ...Anthemurgus
- Glossa about as long as prementum; length first segment of labial palpus about as long as sum
of segments 2-4; metasoma red or red-marked .. Metapsaenythia
d(b). 13 antennal segments (males).......
- 12 antennal segments (females)........
e(d). Ornaulus sharp, at least dorsally; hind tibia with strong, untoothed carina ...Pseudopanurgus
- Ofta 5ffi?rea smoothly curved; hind tibia u,ith upper margin with toothed orserrate
carina, at least at base f
f(e). Scutum with punctures well marked, many of them separated by spaces greater than their
diameters;mid-apical emargination of 56 narrow, deep......... ....pterosarus
- Scutum with punctures very small, homogeneous, usually dense; mid-apical emargination of
56 broader, V-shaped ...........Heterosaruse
o
g(d). Tibial scopalhairs simple
- Tibial scopal hairs branchedHeterosarus
..................h
lltl:llll-lt::::11:til lt:lll:ilil1::ltilll:t :::::1i::::::ll1 ::i:; d.panurgus
- Fore-coxae without hairy apical spine, punctation finer Pterosarus v
v
V
v
\,
\7
v
vFamily Apidae
Glossa long, with flabellum (Michener and Brooks 1984). Labial palpus with first two segments
long, flattened, sheathlike, in striking contrast to last two segments, which are small and directed
laterally (rarely third segment also flattened). Mentum elongate, sclerotized, tapering basally;
lorum Y-shaped or V-shaped, basal arms slender; mentum and lorum forming long lobe
projecting behind proboscis when proboscis is folded. One subantennal suture. Facial foveae
absent or weakly developed. Labrum usually broader than long; if not, narrowed basally to short
articulation with clypeus. Usually three submarginal cells, uncommonly two or even one; if two,
second usually much shorter than first. Scopa, except when absent, on hind tibia; forming a
corbicula in certain tribes. Pygidial plate usually present at least in female.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. Apidae is the largest
family of bees and includes enonnously diverse taxa in terms of morphology, life history, host-
plant associations, and sociality. Like most bee families, Apidae is composed primarily of
solitary, ground-nesting bees but also includes a large proportion of brood parasites (in fact the
largest of any bee family [around 25%]), many cooperatively breeding bees (in the subfamily
Xylocopinae), and many primitively and advanced eusocial groups (including bumble bees
fBombini], stingless bees fMeliponini] and honey bees [Apini]). There are stem and cavity
nesters, wood-nesters, above-ground builders and ground-nesting bees (Danforth et al.2019).
They range from broadly polylectic (e.g., honey bees) to narrow host-plants specialists (e.g.,
members of the tribe Emphorini). A large proportion of the "oil bees" are in this farnily. Higher-
level classification was revised recently by Bossert et al. (2019). Sless et al. (2021) analyzed
phylogenetic relationships among tribes and genera in Nomadinae, Freitas et al. (2020) analyzed
phylogenetic relationships among the tribes and genera of Eucerinae, and Rehan et al. (2012)
analyzedphylogenetic relationship among tribes of Xylocopinae. We follow these studies in our
classification of North and Central American bees (Table 2-1). Taxonomic treatments at the
tribal and subfamily levels include Brooks (1988) for Anthophorini; Snelling (198a) for
Centridini; Snelling and Brooks (1985) for Ericrocidini; Moure and Michener (i955) for
neotropical Eucerini; LaBerge (1957) for Eucerini; Linsley (1939) for Melectini; Roig-Alsina
(1989) for Osirini; Rightmyer (2004) for Epeolini; Linsley and Michener (1939) and Roig-Alsina
(1991) for Nomadinae. Anthophorinae: Anthophorini
See Dubitzky (2007) for an analysis of anthophorine phylogeny and historical biogeography
based on adult morphology.
13. Anthophora Latreille: Small to large, anthophoriform [Figs. 473 and 474], robust, hairy,
with or without tergal hair bands and sometimes with white or yellowish tergal integumental
bands, whole metasoma sometimes covered with pale hair. Often with yellow or pale maculation
on clypeus? scape and/or paraocular area. Most species polylectic but some oligolectic on
Asteraceae; some with modified clypeal hairs with preference for Lamiaceae. Nests excavated in
soil, some with turreted entrances. Common in western USA, rare elsewhere. Boreal, southward
throughout USA, Antilles, and Mexico to Honduras; rare or absent in tropics (cosmopolitan
except Australia). Revision: Brooks ( 1983), subgenus Melea as the bomboides group; Orr et al.
(2018), subgenus Miuanthophora. (couplet 1 l8)
15. Habropoda Smith: Moderate-sizedto rather large, anthophoriform, exactly resembling
Anthophora species in general aspect. Not uncommon in western North America, rare elsewhere.
One species, Habropoda laboriosa, is an important pollinator of blueberries (Vaccinium) inthe
Southeastern United States and can be locally common. Nests excavated in soil. USA from
Rocky Mountain states to Pacific states and Baja California, south in Mexico to Oaxaca; also
Illinois to New England south to Texas and Florida. Revision: None. (couplet 119)
American species of this genus have usually been placed in Emphoropszs Ashmead; Brooks
(1988) has shown that Emphoropsis is a synonym of Habropoda.
Apinae: Apini
16. Apis Linnaeus: Moderate-sized, apiform fFigs. 506 and 507], black, usually with amber or
yellowish areas on metasoma. Apis can be distinguished from all other genera in our area based
on the combination of hairy eyes and absence of hind tibial spurs [Fig. 5a]. Abundant; one
species in our area, the introduced honey bee, Apis mellifera Linnaeus. Ubiquitous, tropics north
far into Canada. Formerly rare in lowland moist tropical America, but introduction of the African
subspecies A. mellifera scutellata has resulted in abundan ce of Apis mellifera in both tropical and
temperate regions (now cosmopolitan; originally palearctic, oriental, and African). Highly
eusocial; nests in cavities in trees, in soil, in man-made hives, and so forth; occasionally combs
of cells hang in the open. (couplet 13)Y
v
Apinae: Bombini14. Deltoptilo LaBerge and Michener: Moderate-sized to large anthophoriform, hairy,
resembling Anthophora but with unusually protuberant clypeus and long proboscis. Uncommon.
Moderate to high altitudes, Nuevo Leon and Durango south to Costa Rica. Revision: LaBerge
and Michener (1963). (couplet 119) v
v
v
\,
v
v
\7
v
\,
\,
v17. Bomba.s Latreille: Moderate-sized to very large (queens), bombiform [Figs. 508 and 509];
vestiture black, mostly yellow, or usually black with areas of yellow, red, or white. In temperate
America none are all black. Common in mesic temperate and especially cool temperate habitats,
uncommon or rare in deserts and tropics. Arctic, south throughout Canada, USA, Mexico, and on
to South America (holarctic and neotropical). Most species are eusocial, nesting in colonies of
hundreds of workers inhabiting hollows in soil, rodent or bird nests, and so forth. One group
(subgenus Psythirus) are social parasites of free-living Bombus , and a single species of the
subgenus Alpinobombus is parasitic as well (Milliron & Oliver 1966, Brasero et al. 2018).
Revisions: Labougle (1990), Mexican species; Labougle, Ito, and Okazawa (1985), species of
Chiapas and Guatemala; Williams et al. (2014) provide illustrated identification keys to the
subgenera and species of North America north of Mexico. Williams has also made available an
online ke.v to female bumble bees of the world. (couplet 24)
Apinae: Centridini
Martins & Melo (2016) provided a phylogenetic analysis of Centridini
18. Centris Fabricius: Moderate-sized to large (10-30mm), anthophoriform [Figs. 475 and 4761,
hind legs of both sexes with longer and denser hairs than rn Anthophora; metasoma sometimes
red, sometimes weakly metallic bluish or greenish, and sometimes with yellow tergal bands or
lateral spots. Males in some species are metandric, showing strong allometry with large males
differing greatly in appearance from smaller males of the same species. Common in tropics and
southwestern deserts, elsewhere uncommon or rare. Neotropics north through Mexico and as far
as central Califomia and Kansas; also present in Antilles and Florida. Most species in our area
are oil collectors associated with Krameria and species of Malpighiaceae. Oil-collecting females
have combs of specialized setae on the fore- and mid-basitarsi used to harvest the oils which are
transported in the scopal hairs of the legs. Oils are used to line the brood cells and and in some
cases are mixed with pollen to form the larval provisions but other oil-collectors add only nectar
to the provisions. Most species excavate nests in the soil but some use preexisting holes in wood
or in old Sceliphron nests; others nest in termite nests (subgenus Ptilotopzs). Revisions: Snelling
(1966c,1974,1984); Ayala (1999). Michener (2007) provides a key to subgenera. (couplet 107).
The generic name Hemisia Klug has been used in place of Centris.
19. Epicharis Klug: Large, euceriform or anthophoriform, hairy, similar in appearance to
Centris; metasoma sometimes reddish, sometimes with yellow integumental bands. Uncommon.
Neotropical, ranging through tropical parts of Mexico north to Tamaulipas and Nayarit. All
species excavate nests in the ground. All female Epicharis are floral oil collectors and have tarsal
arrays of modified setae similar to those rn Centris. Pollen preferences poorly known for most
species but some with high proportion of Malpighiaceae pollen in diet. Revision: Snelling
(1984). Michener (2007) provides a key to subgenera . (couplet 106)
Apinae: Euglossini
Euglossine bees are a strictly New World group of solitary (Eulaema and Eufriesea), weakly
social (Euglossa), and brood parasitic (Aglae and Exaerere) species. Males collect volatile compounds, often from orchids, for use in mating. Males have a variety of specializations of the
fore, mid and hindlegs for the collection, manipulation, storage and dispersal of these
compounds. Mouthparts typically greatly elongate. Males can be easily collected using odor
baits but females are much harder to collect. Recent phylogenetic studies include Ramirez et al.
(2010) and Bossert et al. (2019). Roubik & Hanson (2004) provides an illustrated field guide
with keys to the genera and species of Mexico and Central America.
20. Aglae Lepeletier and Serville: Large, metallic blue, more elongate than other Euglossini
lFig. 510]; hind tibia of female slender, straight, without corbicula; scutellum flat, posteriorly
truncate. Brood parasites in nests of Eulaema [see Bossert et al.2019]. Very rare; one species,l.
caerulea Lepeletier and Serville. South America north to Panama. (couplet 21)
2I. Eufriesea Cockerell: Large, anthophoriform [Fig. 51 1], hairy; at least face slightly metallic,
one Mexican species has whole body bright green or blue. Rare or uncommon. Widespread in
American tropics including tropical and subtropical Mexico, north to Chihuahua and San Luis
Potosi. Reported from western Texas and adjacent New Mexico but perhaps only a vagrant
(Griswold et al.2015). Nests of bark and resin in large cavities in trees or rocks. Revision:
Kimsey (1982). (couplet 23)
A well-known synonym is Euplusia Moure.
22. Euglossa Latreille: Moderate-sized to large, anthophoriform [Figs. 512 and 513], brilliant
metallic green or, less commonly, blue, purple, or coppery; proboscis in repose reaching to or
beyond metasoma. Not uncommon. Widespread in American tropics, including tropics of
Mexico to Tamaulipas and Sonora; also Jamaica. One species, Euglossa dilemma,was
introduced to Florida and seems locally common (Pascarella 2017). Resin nests in constructed
large cavities in banks or trees or on leaves or twigs. Revisions: Moure (1969,l97O); Dressler
(1978). (couplet 22)
23. Euloema Lepeletier: Large to very large, bombiform [Fig. 514], nonmetallic or metasoma
weakly metallic, hairy. Uncommon. Widespread in American tropics, north through tropical
Mexico to Tamaulipas and Sonora, one old record for southernmost Texas. Nests in large
cavities in banks or trees. Revisions: Moure (1963); Dressler (1979). (couplet 23)
24. Exaerele Hoffmannsegg: Large, euceriform [Fig. 515] but without scopa, uniformly brilliant
green or purple. Rare. Widespread in American tropics, in Mexico north to Hidalgo and Nayarit.
Brood parasites in nests of Eufriesea and Eulaema. Revisions: Moure (96\; Kirnsey (lg7g).
(couplet 2l)
Apinae: Meliponini
The tribe Meliponini includes advanced eusocial bees that are most abundant and diverse in the
tropical regions of the world. All members of the tribe Meliponini would be described as"trigoniform". Phylogenetic relationships were most recently analyzed by Rasmussen &
Cameron (2010). Gniter (2020) provides an excellent overview of stingless bee diversity,
behavior, biology, and evolution, as well as an updated generic and subgeneric classification.V
Y
v
v
v
v v
\,
\,
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v25. Aparatrigons Moure: Small (4.5-5 mm), black with conspicuous yellow to white markings
on face. Rare; tropical. Form small colonies with as many as a few hundred workers; nests are
built exclusively in active termite nests (Roubik 1983). Revision: Camargo & Moure (1994)
recognized two species; Aparatrigona rcfers to a single species in our area (Aparatrigona
isopterophila) which occurs in Panama (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
26. Cephalotrigona Schwarz: Moderate-sized (6-10mm), black or with metasoma red.
Uncommon. Tropical, ranging north to Jalisco and Tamaulipas. Form colonies of hundreds or a
few thousand workers; nest in cavities in tree trunks. Revisions: Schwarz (1948, 1-9a\; Ayala
(1999). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
27 . Dolicltotrigona Moure: Minute (3-4 mm in length), dark brown. Uncommon. This tropical
genus refers to a single species in our area (Dolichotrigona schulthessi), ranging from Panama to
southern Mexico (Chiapas); nests unknown (probably like those of Trigonisca, to which
Dolichotrigona is related). These bees are attracted to perspiration and can be irritating because
of their tendency to fly into eyes, ears, and the nose of humans (Camargo & Pedro 2005).
Revision: Camargo & Pedro (2005) provide key to species. (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of
Meliponini)
28. Frieseomelitta Ihering: Treated as a subgenus of Trigona in Michener (2007). Small (4.0 to
6.5 mm), slender, delicate-looking species; labial palpus of the worker possesses many large,
sinuous setae (illustrated in Michener 2007). A unique feature of this group (relative to other
American genera) is the arrangement of brood cells into clusters rather than combs (Michener
2007). Ranges as far north as Sinaloa and Veracruz, Mexico (extends southward into Brazil).
Revision: ?? (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
29. GeotrigonaMoure: Treated as a subgenus of Trigona inMichener (2007). Small (5.0 to 6.5
mm in length), robust, short-legged, typically black or dark brown species with a broad
metasoma; superficially resemble some of the black species of Portamona, Scaptotrigona, and
Trigona s.s. Most species nest in cavities in the ground. Rare/common? Ranges northward to
Michoac6n, Mexico (extends southward into Argentina). Revision: Camargo & Moure (1996)
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
30. LestrimelittaFriese: Smallish, shiny black, workers (as well as queens) without corbiculae.
Uncommon; two species. Widespread in neotropics, including tropical Mexico north to Nayarit
and San Luis Potosi. Form large colonies in tree trunk cavities; for food and nest materials
workers rob nests of other Meliponini (especially species of the genera Plebeia and
Nannotrigona) and occasionally Apis; they do not visit flowers. Revisions: Schwarz (1948,
1r9a\; Ayala (1999); Oliveira & Marchi (2005); Marchi & Melo (2006) provide keys to species
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
31. Metipona llliger: Smallish to moderate-sized (8- 15 mm), body form similar to that of Apk
[Fig. 516]; coloration similar to that of Apis or with yellow integumental bands on metasomal
terga, sometimes all black. Uncommon. Widespread in neotropics north to Sinaloa and San Luis
Potosi, sometimes attaining high altitudes (e.g., in Morelos), sometimes "domesticated" for honey and wax production; probably introduced to Antilles by pre-Columbian humans.
Advanced eusocial; nests in cavities, usually in trees. Revisions: Schwarz (1932,1949); Ayala
(1999). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
32. Meliwillea Roubik, Segura, and Camargo: small (4.5-5.5 mm body length), shiny, entirely
black, with the robust body form of Scaptotrigona, to which it is presumably related. Meliwillea
is found in the mountains of Costa Rica and western Panama. The only species is M. bivea
Roubik, Segura, and Camargo. Revision: Roubik et al. (2005). (couplet ## inthe Key to Genera
of Meliponini)
33. Nannotrigona Cockerell: Small (3-5 mm), blackish, with whitish facial marks; looks like a
deeply punctate, pitted Plebeia. Common. Tropical, ranging north to San Luis Potosi and Sonora.
Colonies consist of a few hundred workers; nest in cavities in logs or branches, or in walls.
Revisions: Schwarz (1948, 1949); Rasmussen & Gonzalez (2017) provide key to species.
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
34. Nogueirapl's Moure: Previously treated as a subgents of Partamona or Plebeia. Small bees
(3.5-5.5 mm in length) with abundant yellow markings; labial palpi with few and mostly curved,
large setae (as invarious species of Plebeia s. str.);base of metapostnotum shining andhairless.
Ranges as far north as Costa Rica. So far as is known, Nogueirapls species nest in the ground.
Revision: Nogueira et al. (2020) provide key to species (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of
Meliponini)
35. Oxytrigona Cockerell: Rather small, partly reddish or yellowish [Fig. 517], with unusually
large genal areas. Rare. Tropical, ranging north to Chiapas. Colonies consist of a few hundred
workers; nest in cavities in trunks; defense includes biting and releasing extremely irritating
glandular secretions into the skin-hence the name "fire bee." Revisions: Schwarz (1948, 1949);
Gonzalez & Roubik (2008) provide a key to species. (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of
Meliponini)
36. Paratrigona Schwarz: Small (4-5 mm), black with conspicuous yellow to white markings on
face. Rare. Tropical, ranging north to Yeracruz. Colonies consist of a few hundred workers; nests
exposed or in aerial Camponotus nests or in other cavities. Revision: Schwarz (1948) and
Camargo and Moure (1994) provide key to species. Gonzalez & Griswold (2011) provide a
description of the male of Paratrigona ornaticeps as well as a key to certain species groups.
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
37. Partamona Schwarz: Moderate-sized (4.5-7 mm), black or testaceous with dull yellow
marks along inner orbits [Fig. 518]. Common. Tropical, ranging north to Sonora, Chihuahua, and
San Luis Potosi, Mexico. colonies consist of a several thousand workers
; nests sometimes in cavities, usually partly exposed on banks, tree trunks, or buildings.
Revisions: Schwarz Q9a\; Ayala (1999), Camargo & Pedro (2003) provide key to species.
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)V
V
v
V
v
v
v
v \,
v
v
\,
\,38. Plebeis Schwarz: Small (3-6 mm) bees, mostly with whitish or yellow markings on the face
and thorax; unlike Scaura, which commonly has a more slender metasoma, that of Plebeia is as
broad as the thorax. Common. Tropical, ranging north to Sinaloa and Tamaulipas.
Colonies consist of hundreds to thousands of workers; nest in cavities in trees or the ground, or
artificial containers. Revisions: Schwarz Q9a9); Ayala (1999). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera
of Meliponini)
39. PtilotrigonaMotre: The name Ptilotrigona refers to a single species in our area
(Ptilotrigona occidentalrs). Michener (2007) treated Ptilon'igona as a part of Tetragona.It
differs from Tetragona in its larger size (8-9mm), large mandibular teeth (two, on the upper part
of the apical margin), and hairy propodeal triangle. Species of this group are remarkable in that
they store large quantities of pollen (up to 3 kg) in association with yeasts and store little honey.
Ptilotrigona occidentalis ranges northward to Panama and Costa Rica. Revision: Camargo &
Pedro (2004) provide key to species. (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
40. Scaptotrigona Moure: Moderate-sized, robust, blackish to partly testaceous. Common.
Tropical, ranging north to Sinaloa, Durango, and Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Colonies consist of several thousand workers; nest in cavities in tree trunks. Revision: Ayala
(1999). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
41. Scaura Schwarz: Treated by Michener (2007) as a subgenw of Plebeia. Small, all black
bees (4.0-5.5 mm); differ from other Meliponini in the form of the hind basitarsi, which are
nearly as broad as to broader than the tibia and convex on the outer surfaces, at least apically
(Figure?). These large hind basitarsi are used to glean pollen that falls onto plant surfaces from
the activities of other bees (Laroca and Lauer 1973). Ranges northward to Veracruz, Mexico;
only one species (Scaura argyria) in our area. Form nests inside ofthe arboreal nests of
Nasutitermes termites. Revision: Nogueira et al. (2019) provide key to species (couplet ## in the
Key to Genera of Meliponini)
42. TetragonaLepeletier and Serville: Treated by Michener (2007) as a subgenus of Trigona.
Moderate-sized (5-8mm); long-legged bees similar in form to Tetragonisca and Frieseomelitta
but somewhat less delicate. Range northward to Tabasco, Mexico. Revision: None. (couplet ##
in the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
43. Tetragonisca Moure: Treated by Michener (2007) as a subgenw of Trigona. Small (4-
5mm), slender bees with extensive yellow coloration; corbicula reduced, concavity limited to the
apical one-fifth of the tibia and not occupying the full tibial width. Range northward to Veracruz,
Mexico. Revision: None. (couplet ## inthe Key to Genera of Meliponini)
44. Trigona Jurine: Small (4-5mm), slender, black to largely yellowish or with metasoma red,
[Fig. 519]. Common. Tropical, ranging north to Nayarit and Veracruz, Mexico. Colonies consist
of hundred to thousands of workers; nest in cavities in the soil or in hollow trucks or branches,
sometimes in stone walls, in termite nests, or exposed on branches of trees. Revisions: Schwarz
(1948, 1949); Ayala (1999); see Camargo & Roubik (1991) for a revision of the necrophagous
species (7. hypogea group). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Meliponini) 45. Trigonisca Moure: Minute (often under 3 mm long). Generally uncommon. Tropical,
ranging north in the tropics to the states of Veracruz and Jalisco. Highly eusocial in colonies of
hundreds in small cavities such as old cerambycid beetle burrows in stems or branches. These
bees are attracted to perspiration and can be irritating because of their tendency to fly into eyes,
ears and the nose of humans (Michener 2007)- Revisions: Schwarz (1949 [as subgenus of
Trigonal); Ayala (1999); Albuquerque & Camargo (2007) provide key to species. (couplet ## in
the Key to Genera of Meliponini)
Eucerinae: Ancyloscelidini
46. Ancyloscelis Latreille: Small, robust (especially in females), anthophoriform [Fig. 484],
moderately hairy with metasomal hair bands. Males easily recognized by enormous hind legs;
females superficially resemble Exomalopsrs but with a protuberant clypeus. Uncommon, rare in
USA Widespread in neotropics, north through Mexico to Arizona, Colorado, and Texas. Nests
excavated in soil, often in vertical surfaces. Our species are oligolectic on lpomoea
(Convolvulaceae). Revision: Michener (1942, US species). (couplet 131)
Eucerinae: Emphorini (synonym: Melitomini)
47 . Diadasia Patton: Small to moderate-sized, anthophoriform [Fig. 477] or euceriform, hairy;
metasoma commonly with pale hair bands or general coverage of pale hair; T7 of male with two
small apical lobes or points. Common, or rare in tropics. Southwestern Canada, western half of
USA east to Mississippi, Mexico, and on to temperate South America. Phylogenetic relationships
among species were analyzedby Sipes & Wolf (2001) and host-plant evolution was analyzedby
Sipes & Tepedino (2005). Narrow host-plant specialists on plants in the families Malvaceae,
Cactaceae, Convolvulaceae, Asteraceae, and Onagraceae (Sipes & Tepedino 2005). Gregarious
nesting common. Nests excavated in the soil, entrances turreted. Revision: Timberlake (1941\,
species north of Mexico. (couplet 130)
48. Melitoma Lepeletier and Serville: Moderate-sized, anthophoriform, with distinctive pattem
of hairs of different colors on dorsum of thorax and narrow metasomal pale hair bands. Not
uncommon. Nests excavated in the soil, usually in vertical surfaces including adobe walls,
entrances turreted. Known to gather water for nest construction. Widespread neotropical, north
through Mexico to central and eastern USA, north to North Dakota and New Jersey. Oligolectic
on flowers of lpomoea. Revision: None. (couplet 130)
49. Ptilothrix Smith: Moderate-sizedto large, euceriform; like other Emphorini, vertex seen
from front is rounded and head is relatively small. Uncommon; two described species and one
undescribed species in the desert southwest. Nests excavated in the soil, entrances turreted. Some
species known to land on water to gather used during nest excavation. Our described species
oligolectic onHibiscus and lpomoea (Malvaceae)andKallstroemia(Zygophyllaceae). Oaxaca
to Arizona; Texas to Florida north to Kansas and Ontario , Canada; also temperate South
America. Revision: None. (couplet 105)
A widely used synonymous generic name is Emphor patton.v
Y
v
V
v v
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
\,Eucerinae: Eucerini
The tribe Eucerini ("long-homed" bees) is a distinctive group. Males have elongate antennae
(Fig. ##) and females have a characteristic w-shaped gradulus on 52 (Figs. 253,254). Once you
become familiar with recognizing these features, it becomes easy to distinguish Eucerini from
other large,hairy, apid bees. The taxonomy of this group has been a challenge, to put it mildly.
The generic and subgeneric boundaries are difficult to define and, while recent phylogenetic
studies have significantly improved our understanding of relationships (Dorchin et al. 2018a,b;
,,Freitas etal.2020) and historical biogeography (Freitas et al. 2022), the morphological features' that allow generic or subgeneric identification remain extremely subtle. For this reason, we have
separated Eucerini out from the main key (see Chapter 9), to facilitate revisions to the key as the
taxonomy changes. Our key (Chapter 9) is based on the key provided in Dorchin et al. (20i8a).
50. Agapanthinus LaBerge: Moderate-sized, euceriform, with pale tergal hair bands; aspect of
Melissodes. Floral hosts unknown but compound eyes and ocelli enlarged suggesting matinal or
crepuscular foraging. Rare; one species, A. callophila (Cockerell). Baja California and
Califomia deserts. See LaBerge (1957). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
Eucera Scopoli: Small to large, anthophoriform or euceriform, hairy, fast-flying bees. North
subgenera include Tetralonia (including Tetraloniella), Peponapis, Xenoglossa,
Cemolobus, Syntrichalonia, Synhalonia, and Xenoglossodes (including Pectinapis). This is a
mainly Holarctic group, ranging across our area from Canada to Central America, with few
species in South America, most diverse in temperate areas. Around 400 species worldwide with
approximately 115 species in our area. Many subgroups are narowly oligolectic, including
Cemolobus (oligolectic on lpomoeo), and Peponapis and Xenoglossa (oligolectic on Cucurbita)
This is a challenging group and there is currently no key to the subgenera of North America.
(couplet ## rnthe Key to Genera of Eucerini)
Revisions:
Loxoptilis (now part of Xenoglossodes):LaBerge, 1957
Pectinapis (now part of Xenoglossodes): LaBerge, 1989a
Peponapis: Hurd and Linsley (1964, US species;1966, Mexican species; 1970).
Syntrichalonia: see LaBerge ( 1 95 7)
Synhalonia: Timberlake ( 1 969a)
Xenoglossa: Hurd and Linsley (1964, US species;1967;1970)
Xenoglossodes (as Tetraloniella):LaBerge 2001(this is a paraphyletic assemblage)
52. Floritegzs Robertson: Moderate-sized, euceriform, commonly with tergal hair bands; aspect
of Melissodes but tergal surface usually feebly bluish or greenish. Uncommon; eleven species,
two in our area. Widespread in neotropics, ranging in humid and mesic areas through Antilles
and Mesoamerica to central and eastern USA, north to Colorado, Nebraska, and New Jersey.
Some species with hooked hairs on mouthparts associated with Pontederiaceae. Revision: Urban
(1970). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
53. Gaesischia Michener, LaBerge and Moure: Smallish or moderate-sized, euceriform [Fig.
480], with weak tergal hair bands. Uncommon; 36 species, two in our region.. Neotropical, mostly in dry areas, through Mexico to southem Arizona.. Revisions: Urban (1968a); La-Berge
(1958a). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
The subgenus Gaesischia s.str. may be strictly South American, but Urban (1968a) considers
Prodasyhalonia a synonym of Gaesischia s.str., which would therefore reach Mexico. The male
of Prodasyhalonia is unknown and may not run to Gaesischia in the Key to Genera of Eucerini.
54. Martinapis Cockerell: Moderate-sized euceriform or anthophoriform, males with yellow
antennae. Rare; three species, two in our area. Kansas and Texas to California, south to Puebla,
disjunct to Argentina. Matinal, commonly associated with Psorothamnus and related Fabaceae.
Our species belong to the subgenus Martinapis s.str. Revision: Zavortink and LaBerge (1976).
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
55. Melissodes Latrellle: Moderate-sized to smallish, euceriform [Figs. 481 and 482], with or
less commonly without bands of pale hair on terga. Common; 129 species, with 122 in our area.
US species, The most common eucerine genus in most of North America. Canada and the
Antilles to Argentina but rare in tropics. Some species nest communally with several individuals
sharing a burrow entrance. Most species in the large subgenus Eumelissodes are oligolectic on
Asteraceae while members of Melissodes s. str. are all polylectic. Other species are oligoletic on
Malvaceae, Pontederiaceae, Onagraceae. Revision: LaBerge (1956a,b; 1961); Svastrawas
included in Melissodes in that revision. A recent phylogeny by Wright et al. (2020) suggests that
some subgeneric boundaries may need revision. The anteriorly narrowed tegulae are diagnostic
but are a subtle character that may require removal of hair to see. (couplet ## in the Key to
Genera of Eucerini)
56. MelissoptilaHolmberg: Smallish, euceriform, metasomal terga commonly covered with
short tawny hairs or at least with broad apical zones of such hairs; aspect suggestive of small
Melissodes. Moderately common, rare in Antilles and Texas; 55 species, two in our area.
Neotropical, ranging north in tropical and subtropical areas to Antilles and through Mexico to
central Texas. Revision: Urban (1968b). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
57. Simanthedon Zavortink: Moderate-sized, euceriform [Fig. 483], without pale hair bands on
metasomal terga. Snoutlike clypeal profile of male is particularly distinctive. Rare; one species,
S. linsleyi Zavortink. Texas to Arizona deserts south to Durango. See Zavortink (1975). (couplet
## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
58. Protohslonia Dorchin: Originally referred to as the "venusta-group" of Synhalonia,this
genus was recently recognized based on a molecular phylogeny of the Eucera complex (Dorchin
et al.2018a). Moderate-sized to large, euceriform; metasoma with pale white apical hairbands
(P. venusta and P. amoena) or entirely dark (P. carinata); pygidial plate strongly elevated along
midline. Rare; primarily distributed in the southwestem USA (including Mojave, Sonoran,
Chihuahuan, and Great Basin deserts) and Baja California, Mexico; P. venusta occurs as far
north as Oregon. The three species of Protohalonia are spring-active and all are reported to be
matinal and vespertine. While species of Protohalonia are considered to be host-plant specialists
on Onagraceae (Clarkia and Camissonia), they are frequently collecte d on Larrea
(Zygophyllaceae) and may be more generalized in their host-plant preferences (Dorchin 2018a).
(couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)v
v
v
v
Y
v
V \,
v
v
\-
v
v
\,
\,
v
v
\,
v59. Svastra Holmberg: Large to moderate-sized, euceriform, commonly with tergal hair bands
or terga suffused with pale hair; aspect is that of large Melissodes. Common. 23 species, 20 in
our area. Throughout southernmost Canada, USA, and Mexico south to Argentina and Chile, rare
in tropics. Some species have communal nests, several individuals using one burrow. Many
species are oligolectic on Asteraceae . Anthedonia (oligolectic on Oenothera) and ldiomelissodes
(oligolectic on Ferocacfzs), were treated as genera in the first edition of this book but are now
considered subgenera of Svastra. A recent molecular study (Freitas et al,2021) indicates the
North American species placed in Svastra are not closely related to the South American Svastra
s. str. If this result is supported, the North American species will become the genus
Epimelissodes. Revisions: Laberge (1955) subgenus Anthedonia; LaBerge (1956a,1958b),
remaining subgenera, as part of Melissodes. (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
60. Thygater Holmberg: Moderate-sized to rather large, euceriform,hairy, with strongly
protuberant clypeus, long mouthparts, very long black antennae in males, and without metasomal
hair bands. Uncommon to common; 31 species, eight in our area. Like some Svas/ra, vibratile
pollen collectors. Neotropical (including mountains), extending northward in Mexico to Sonora
and Chihuahua. Revision: Urban (1967). (couplet ## in the Key to Genera of Eucerini)
Eucerinae: Exomalopsini
61. Anthophorula Cockerell: This group was historically includedin Exomalopsis until Silveira
(i993a,b) recognized it as a distinct genus. Anthophorula includes minute to moderate-sized
(2.5-8mm), compact, rotund, hairy, anthophoriform bees with two or three submarginal cells
(hence, this genus comes out in two places in the Key to the Genera); a few species have a red
metasoma. Distributed across the western US as far north as Oregon and eastward to Indiana and
south to Yeracruz and Oaxaca, Mexico. As in Exomalopsis, nests of lnthophorula are usually
communally occupied burrows, each being inhabited by several females (Rozen, 1984). Floral
associations poorly known for most species, some polylectic but others oligolectic on
Amaranthaceae, Asteraceae, Euphorbiaceae or Scrophulariaceae. Michener (2001) provides a
key to subgenera. Revisions (as Exomalopsis): Timberlake 1980a).
62. Exomalopsis Spinola: Small to moderate-sized (4-12mm), chubby, hairy, anthophoriform
[Figs. 485 and 486] bees. Common in tropics north to southwestem USA, moist tropics to desert,
uncommon elsewhere. Present from Baja Califomia and Sonora, Mexico; Arizona,New Mexico,
southern Texas and southem Florida, USA; and the Bahamas south through Mesoamerica, the
Antilles and into South America. Nests are communal with multiple females sharing a burrow.
All species appear to be polylectic. (Rozen 1984). Revisions: Timberlake (1947, USA only;
1980a). Michener (2001) provides a key to subgenera. (couplets 127 and 199)
Eucerinae: Tapinotaspidini
Almost all members of the Tapinotaspidini, like most Centridini, are oil-collecting bees. In our
area, females of Monoecahave combs of specialized hair on their fore- and mid-basitarsi while
both males and females of Paratetrapedia have combs only on their fore-basitarsi. Female Monoeca are known to collect oils of Malpighiaceae and most floral oil records for female
Paratetrapedia are for Malpighiaceae as well. Oils are used to line the brood cells and are mixed
with pollen as larval food.
63. Monoeca Lepeletier and Serville: Moderate-sized, anthophoriform, like a large Exomalopsis
without metasomal hair bands; head and thorax hairy; metasoma sometimes red. Rare. Nests
excavated in soil. Tropical America, north in tropical Mexico to Jalisco. Revision: None.
(couplet 128)
The synonymous name Fiorentinia Dalla Torre has sometimes been used for this genus.
64. ParatetrapediaMoure: Small to moderate-sized (6-12mm), somewhat shiny, nonhairy,
trigoniform [Fig. a87]. Strikingly mimetic of various species of Trigona-black, largely or
wholly yellow or testaceous, black u,ith red metasoma, and so forth; face of male with yellow or
white areas. Moderately common. Widespread in neotropics, extending into tropical Mexico at
least to San Luis Potosi and Jalisco; also Jamaica. Females of the subgenus Xanthopedia nest in
earth banks; females of other subgenera probably nest in preformed holes in wood. Revision:
Aguiar & Melo 2011. (couplets 114 and 128)
Variation and intermediacy in the shape of the posterior thoracic profile (couplet 108) leads to
the appearance of Paratetrapedia twice in the Key to the Genera.
Nomadinae: Ammobatini
65. Oreopasiles Cockerell: Minute to small (2.2-7.5mm), epeoliform, usually with red
metasoma and without well-defined areas of short, pale hair. Rare. Colorado to California, south
to Durango, Mexico. Brood parasites of Calliopsls (subgenera Hypomacrotera,
Micronomadopsis, Nomadopsls) and Perdita (subgenera Epimacrotera, Hexaperdita, and
Perdita s. str.). Revisions: Linsley (1941); Rozen (1992). (couplet 199)
Nomadinae: Ammobatoidini
66. Holcopasites Ashmead: Minute to small, coarsely sculptured, epeoliform [Figs. 494 and
495); metasoma usually red, terga with small spots or bands of short white pubescence.
Uncommon. Southern Canada, USA except Pacific Coast, northern Mexico, Mexican plateau
south to Puebla. Brood parasites of Calliopsrs (subgenera Calliopsima, Calliop.sis s.str.,
Hypomacrotera, and Verbenapis), Protandrena (subgenera Heteroserus, Metapsaenythio, and
Pseudopanurgus). and Panurgizas. Revisions: Linsley (19a3b); Hurd and Linsley (1972).
(couplet 179)
Nomadinae: Brachynomadiniv
v
v
Y
v
'vMichener (1996) reviewed the genera of the tribe and provides a genus key for the Western
Hemisphere. \,
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v67. Bruchynomada Cockerell: Small to moderate-sized (3.5-9mm), nomadiform, black,
commonly with red metasoma, superficially resembling some of the smallest species of Nomada.
Rare. Great Plains (Montana to Texas) to southem California south to Morelos. Brood parasite of
Anthophorula (Exomalopsini). Revision: Snelling and Rozen (19S7). (couplets 33 and I92)
Hesperonomada Linsley is a synonym of the subgenus Melanomada, diffeing in having two
instead of three submarginal cells. Brachynomadatherefore appears twice in the Key to the
Genera.
68. Parunomada Linsley and Michener: Moderate-sized (5-1lmm), smooth and shiny, black or
red, nomadiform [Fig. 500], with some areas of dense pubescence. Thorax dorsoventrally
flattened, unlike any other bee, presumably to allow it to spend extended periods in the
communal nests of its hosts.. Rare. Deserts of southwestem USA and northern Mexico. Brood
parasites of Exomalopsrs. Revisions: Linsley (1943c,1945). (couplet 30)
69. Triopasr'les Linsley: Small (4-6.5mm), nomadifonn or epeoliform [Fig. 501], usually with
metasoma red. Rare. Texas to Califomia,Baja California, USA south to Tamaulipas, Morelos,
and Guerrero to Baja California, Mexico. Brood parasitic on Anthophorula. Revision: Linsley
$9a3c). (couplet 32)
Nomadinae: Coelioxoidini
70. Coelioxoides Cresson: Moderate-sized (7.5-13mm), head and thorax very coarsely pified,
metasoma tapering to point suggestive of Coelioxys, terga with narrow hair bands, wings
darkened with distinct pattern of light and dark areas; extremely long sting. Rare; one species in
our area, C. punctipennis Cresson. Widespread in American tropics, north into tropical Mexico
as far as San Luis Potosi. Brood parasite of Tetrapedia (Alves-dos-Santos et aL.2002). Revision:
Roig-Alsina (1990). (couplet 101)
Nomadinae: Epeolini
Rightmyer (2004) provides a thorough, well-illustrated review and phylogenetic analysis of the
genera of the tribe Epeolini.
71. Epeolus Latreille: Small to moderate-sized, epeoliform, pattemed like Triepeolus.
Moderately common. Southern Canadathrough USA, Antilles, Mesoamerica, and South
Amercia (holarctic, neotropical, and African). Brood parasites of Colletes. Revisions: Onuferko
(2017) for Canada; Onuferko (2018) for the Nearctic region (north of Mexico); and Onuferko
(20T9) for the Caribbean, Central America and Mexico. (couplet 112)
Most species have three submarginal cells and run directly to couplet ll2,but a few have only
two and run to couplet 112 via couplet 181 .
Epeolus has, in the past, been divided into two subgeneru: Epeolus s.s. and Trophocleptria
(sometimes also treated as a genus). A recent phylogentic study by Onuferko et al. (2019)
identified six discrete monophyletic groups within Epeolus but did not designate new subgenera based on these groupings. Before such a subgeneric classification is proposed, we prefer not to
recognize subgenera of Epeolus, as recommended by Onuferko et al. (2019).
72. Odyneropsis Schrottky: Moderate-sized to rather large (9-l7mm), slender epeoliform or
nomadiform, nonhairy, wasplike, largely black or brown. Rare. Widespread in neotropics,
ranging north through Mexico to southern Arizona. Brood parasites of Ptiloglossa. Revision:
None. (couplet 111)
The moderate-sized species, known north only to Panama, have been placed in the genus
Parammobales Friese, but this group does not seem to differ at the generic level from the larger,
typical Odyneropsis.
73. Thulestria Smith: Rather large (12-19mm), epeoliform, brilliantly metallic blue-green
because of colored scalelike hairs; scutellar as well as axillar spines sharp; 56 of female much as
in Triepeohzs; pseudopygidial area of T5 small, dark, about three times as wide as long. Rare;
one species, T. smaragdiza Smith. South America northward to Costa Rica. Brood parasites of
Oxaea. (couplet I 10)
74. Triepeolzs Robertson: Moderate-sized to large, epeoliform [Fig. 493], with striking pattem
of bands and spots produced by areas of short pale pubescence; males almost indistinguishable
from those of Epeolus. Common in nearctic region, rare in tropics. Largest genus of Epeolini in
our area with over 130 species. Southern Canada, USA, Antilles, and Mexico, south to Central
and South America (few species also in palearctic region). Brood parasites of diverse hosts
including Dieunomia (Halictidae), Protoxaea (Andrenidae), Ptiloglossa (Colletidae) but mostly
of Eucerini (Apidae), Revision: Righmyer (2008); provides keys to all female Triepeolus
(excluding the verbesinae and simplex species groups) for western North and Central America.
(couplet 1 12)
The great rnajority of species have three submarginal cells and run directly to couplet 1 12, but a
few have two submarginal cells and run to couplet 712 via couplet 181.
Nomadinae : Epeoloidini
75. Epeoloides Gtaud: Rather small (7-10 mm), dark, nonhairy, epeoliform; body all black.
Extremely rare; only one species, E. pilosullzs (Cresson). Northeastem and central USA and
across southern Canada from Alberta to Nova Scotia (holarctic). Brood parasite of Macropis.
(couplet I 15)
E. pilosulus is one of the rarest bees in North America. It was, in fact, thought to be extinct
because specimens had not been collected since the 1960s. However, a number of reports from
Alberta to Connecticut between2002 and2021have documented that Epeoloides pilosulus is
still present, but remains extremely rare (Sheffield et aL.2004, Sheffield and Heron 2018, Wood
et aL.2019, Wagner & Ascher 2008, Gibbs et al.2021). The biology of the European E.
coecutiens (Fabricius) was described by Bogush (2005). Its presumed host, Macropis, remains
widespread but localized to patches of its required host-plant, Lysimachia (Primulaceae).
Nomadinae: Ericrocidini (synonym: Ctenioschelini)v
v
v
v
v
v \,
\,
v
v
\,7 6 . Acanthop us Khtg Very large (20-25 mm), dark blue (resulting from appressed blue
pubescence) anthophoriform but without scopa; hind legs extremely long, with conspicuous
black fringes on basitarsi. Rare; one species, A. palntata (Olivier). South America to Panama.
Brood parasitic on the Centris subgenus Ptilotopus. See Snelling and Brooks (1985). (couplet
e7)
77 . Aglaomelissa Snelling and Brooks: Moderate-sized (9-10 mm), anthophoriform but without
scopa. Superficially resembles Mesoplia but metallic color of metasomal terga integumental
rather than due to scalelike hairs. Rare; one species, A. duckei (Friese). South America to Costa
Rica. Probably Brood parasite of Cenn'is. See Snelling and Brooks (1985). (couplet 100)
78. Ctenioschelus Romand: Large (-15 mm), anthophoriform but without scopa. Female similar
in appearanceto Mesoplia and Mesocheira but metasomal scalelike hairs green; male remarkable
for extremely long antennae, suggesting those of a cerambycid beetle; arolia present, unlike other
genera of this tribe. Rare. Neotropics north through tropical Mexico to Jalisco. Brood parasitic,
probably on Centris. See Snelling and Brooks (1985). (couplet 100)
79. Ericrocis Cresson: Middle-sized or rather large (9-15 rnm), anthophoriform [Fig. 478] but
without scopa, black with conspicuous white to tawny spots and bands of short, dense
pubescence. Uncommon to locally common. Southern California deserts to Texas, also Florida,
south through Mexican desert and plateau to Oaxaca. Brood parasite of Centris. Revision:
Snelling andZavortink (198a). (couplet 96)
80. MesocheiruLepeletier and Serville: Moderate-sized, anthophoriform, without scopa;
metasoma metallic because of blue or greenish metallic scales. Uncommon; one species, M
bicolor (Fabricius). Neotropical region north to Guerrero and Veracruz; also Antilles. Brood
parasitic, probably on Centris. See Snelling and Brooks ( 1985). (couplet 99)
81. Mesoplia Lepeletier: Rather large, anthophoriform [Fig. 479lbut without scopa, resembling
Ctenioschelus and Mesocheira; metasomal scalelike hairs blue or blue-green. Rare or locally
common. Neotropics, north through tropical Mexico to Tamaulipas and southem Arizona; also
Antilles. Brood parasites of Centris and Epicharrs. See Snelling and Brooks (1985). (couplet 98)
Nomadinae: Hexepeolini
82. Hexepealzs Linsley and Michener: Moderate-sized (7-8 mm), epeoliform [Fig. 497], with
apical tergal hair bands on sometimes red metasoma. Rare; one species, Hexepeolus rhodogyne
Linsley and Michener. Deserts of southern California, Arizona, and Sonora. Brood parasite of
Ancylondrena (Rozen 1992). Revisions: Linsley and Michener (1937); Shanks Gingras (1983).
(couplets 32 and l9l)
This genus appears twice in the Key to the Genera because of intraspecific variation in the
number of submarginal cells; nearly all specimens have three.
Nomadinae: Melectini 83. Braclrymelectu Linsley: Moderate-sizedto rather large (8-16 mm), euceriform [Fig.488] but
without scopa, with somewhat hairy head and thorax and usually with patches or broken bands of
short white hair on metasoma; mostly with three submarginal cells, rarely with two, thus the
genus comes out in two different locations in the Key to Genera. Common in western USA, rare
elsewhere. Frorn Central Alberta to Oaxaca, Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico and US Virgin
Islands. Revised by Onuferko et al., (2021) who recently synonymized Xeromelecta under
Brachymelecta.Brood parasites of Anthophora. Revisions: Onuferko et al., (2021). (couplets ##
and##)
84. Melecta Latreille: Rather large (i0-18 mm), hairy anthophoriform, without scopa; head,
thorax, and base of metasoma hairy, metasoma with or without limited patches of short white
hair. Uncommon in western USA, elsewhere rare. Southwestern Canada, USA except northeast,
Baja California, perhaps other parts of northern Mexico (holarctic). Brood parasites of
Anthophora and Habropoda. Revisions: Linsley (1939); Hurd and Linsley (1951), California
species (all American species occur in that state). (couplet 116)
85. Zacosmia Ashmead: Small (5-9 mm), anthophoriform but without scopa, metasoma partly to
wholly variegated with pale gray or brown because of short, appressed hair. Uncommon; one
species, Z. maculata (Cresson). Southern Alberta, USA from Rocky Mountains to Pacific coast,
Texas, Chihuahua (unsubstantiated record for Durango). Brood parasite of Anthophora,
subgenus Heliophila (Torchio and Youssef 1968) See Hurd and Linsley (1951). (couplet 104)
Nomadinae: Neolarrini
See Bossert et al. (2020) for a comprehensive treatment of the phylogeny and classification of
the genera now included in the tribe Neolarrini. These genera were previously placed in three
tribes (Neolarrini, Townsendiellini, and Biastini) which have now been consolidated into a more
broadly defined Neolarrini.
86. Biastes Panzer (North American forms previously treated as genus Neopasites Ashmead):
Minute to small (3.5-8 mm), epeoliform lFig.492), sometimes with red metasoma, and without
discrete patches of short, pale hairs. Rare. Califomia, Anzona, and Baja California Norte. Brood
parasites of Dufourea. Revision: Linsley (1943a), as Gnathopasites. (couplet 201)
87. Neolarra Ashmead: Minute to small (2-7 mm), epeoliform lFig.496l, often largely covered
with short, pale hair; marginal cell very short, truncate, even more reduced than in Perdita.
Uncommon. Prairie Provinces (Alberta to Manitoba), westem half of USA; Sonora, Chihuahua
Durango and Veracruz, Mexico; east to Georgia, USA . Brood parasitic on Perdita. Revisions:
Michener (1939b); Shanks (1978). (couplet 174)
88. Rhopalolemma Roig-Alsina: Moderate-sized, epeoliform, metasoma red with strong bands
of short, pale pubescence; apices of third valvulae (sting sheaths) swollen. Rare. Southemv
v
v
V
v \,
v
v
V
v
v
v
\,
\,California, Arizona. Rhopalolemma is abrood parasite of Protodufourea (Rozen et al. 1997)
Revision: the two species are distinguished in Rozen et al. (1997) (couplet 202)
89. Townsendiells Crawford: Minute to small (4-6 mm), epeoliform [Fig. 502], metasoma
sometimes red, commonly with bands or areas of short, white pubescence. Rare. Southwestem
USA and Baja California, in xeric areas. Brood parasites of Hesperaprs and probably of
Conanthaliclzs. Revisions: Linsley (1943c), Orr and Griswold (2015). (couplets 179 and202)
Because of variation in the relative lengths of the submarginal cells and in the position of the
first recurrent vein (couplet 175), Townsendiella appears twice in the Key to the Genera.
Nomadinae: Nomadini
90. Nomuda Scopoli: Small (almost minute) to moderate-sized, wasplike, slender nomadiform
fFigs. 498 and 499], without conspicuous pubescence; black or red, commonly with yellow or
white markings, sometimes largely black with metasoma red or largely yellow. Common in
temperate regions, rare in tropics; Nomada is the largest genus of brood parasitic bees in our
area, with nearly 300 total described species (Table 2-1). Boreal regions of Canada throughout
USA, Mexico, Antilles, and on to South America (cosmopolitan, scarce in sub-Saharan Africa
and Australia). Brood parasites of Agapostemon, Andrena, Halictus, Nomia, Exomalopsis,
Synhalonia, and, in the palearctic region, Lasioglossum, Melitta, and Panurgars; most temperate
climate species attack Andrena. Revisions: Evans (1972), subgenus Holonomada; Rodeck
(1949), subgenus Nomadita, underthe name Callinomada Rodeck; Swenk (1912), species of
Nebraska; Broemeling (1988), subgenus Nomadita; Broemeling and Moalif (1988), subgenus
Pachynomada. Snelling's (1986a) subdivision of the genus is not followed here, but the keys to
subgenera provide access to the subgeneric revisions listed above. The largest subgenera have
never been revised. Odanaka et al. (2022) provide a phylogeny and analysis of historical
biogeography. (couplets 33, 178, andl92)
A stable subgeneric classification has not yet been developed (Michener 2001). Because of
variation in the number and relative sizes of the submarginal cells, Nomada comes out three
times in the Key to the Genera; most species run to couplet 33.
Nomadinae: Osirini
Based on the phylogenetic analysis of Sless et al. (2021), the group of genera formerly treated as
the tribe Osirini (sensu lato)has been reclassified into three tribes: Osirini sensu stricto,
Parepeolini, and Epeoloidini. Only Osirini s.s. and Epeoloidini (see above) occur in our area.
97. Osiris Smith: Moderate-sized (6-18 mm), smooth and shiny, nomadiform [Fig. 489],
superficially almost hairless, yellowish brown or rarely blackish. Rare. Widespread in American
tropics, north to San Luis Potosi and Nayarit. Brood parasitic on Paratetrapedia (Michener
2007). Revisions: Shanks (1986; 1987, Mexican species). (couplet 29)
92. Protosiris Roig-Alsina: Moderate sized (9.5-17 mm); superficially like Osiris; see characters
in the Key to the Genera. Rare. American tropics north to Puebla, Mexico. Only one described
species in our area (P. obtusus). Brood parasitic on Monoeca (Tapinotaspidini) in South America (Rocha-Filho & Melo 201l), potentially others. Revisions: Included in Shanks (1986); see
Roig-Alsina (1989). (couplet 29)
Nomadinae: Protepeolini
93. Leiopodzs Smith: Moderate-sized epeoliform [Fig. 491], not hairy but with striking pattem
of areas of short pale pubescence; arolia are extraordinarily large, often longer than the claws,
and swollen apically. Rare. Texas to California south to Guatemala, in xeric regions (other
species, Venezuela to Argentina). Brood parasites of emphorine genera Diadasia, Melitoma, and
Ptilothrix (Rozen et al. 1978, Roig-Alsina and Rozen 1994). Revision: Eickwort and Linsley
(1978). (couplet 125)
In North America this genus has been called Protepeolus Linsley and Michener, which is a
junior synonym of the South American Leiopodus. The tribal name Protepeolini remains valid.
Nomadinae: Rhathymini
94. Nanorhathymus l:RhathyntodeslEngel, Michener, and Rightmyer: Moderate-sized to large
(13-18 mm), elongate epeoliform or nomadiform [Fig. a90]; superficially resemble large
Osirinus (tribe Osirini); mesepisternum lacking large submedian tubercle present in Rhathymus
(see below). Rare; only one species known in our area (Nanorhathymus acutiventris).
Neotropical, ranging northward into central Mexico. Brood parasites but hosts are unknown;
perhaps brood parasites of Epichans. Revision: Engel, Michener, and Rightmyer (2004).
(couplet ###)
95. RhatlrymusLepeletier and Serville: Large (16-28 mm), elongate epeoliforrn or nomadiform
[Fig. a90]; species vary from black, the metasoma frequently red, to largely yellow;
mesepisternum with large submedian tubercle;. Rare. Neotropical, ranging into tropical Mexico
as far as San Luis Potosi. Brood parasites of Epicharis (Michener 2007). Revision: Engel,
Michener, and Rightmyer (2004). (couplet 115)
Xylocopinae: Ceratinini
96. Cerotina Latreille: Minute to moderate-sized, sparsely haired, shiny, slender hylaeiform
[Figs. 503 and 504] or nomadiform but with tibial scopa; black to weakly blue or green or in
tropics varying to brilliant green, some with metasoma coppery or red. Such size and coloration
suggests augochlorine halictids, from which Ceratina differs as follows: -elossa and labial palpi
long, basal vein only gently curved, clypeus shaped like thick inverted T and commonly with a
yellow or white mark in female and extensively pale in male; femoral scopa absent. Common.
Neotropics including Antilles, norlh throughout Mexico and USA (rare in deserts) to Canada
(cosmopolitan). Nests in burrows, usually made by the bees, in pith of dead stems. Polylectic.
Revision: Daly (1973), species north of Mexico; Rehan & Sheffield (201i) for a key and
taxonomic review of the species of Ceratino in the eastern USA (couplets 34 and 120)
Because of variation and especially intermediacy in the apex of the marginal cell (couplet 26),
Ceratina appears twice in the Key to the Genera.:/
V
v \,
v
v
vXylocopinae: Tetrapediini
97. TetropediaKlug: Rather small, shining, trigoniform, resembling a rather elongate, unusually
hairy (in ours) black Trigona; appearance similar to that of black Paratetrapediabut more hairy,
face of rnale black. Moderately common. Widespread in tropical America, north to Tamaulipas
and Jalisco, absent from Caribbean Islands. Tetrapedia,hke member of the Tapidotaspidini and
Centridini are "oil bees". Both males and females have unusually modified forebasitarsi for oil
collection and modified scopal hairs for transporting floral oils. Unlike other oil-collecting bees,
female Tetrapedia forage from beneath the flower when harvesting oils of Malpighiacae. Oils are
used to line the brood cells and are mixed with pollen as larval food. Apparently polylectic.
Nests in preformed burrows in wood (Alves-dos-Santos et aL.2002, Camillo 2005). Revision:
None. (couplet 103)
Xylocopinae : Xylocopini
98. Xylocops Latreille: Large to very large, anthophoriform or bombiform [Fig. 505], black to
rnetallic blue or green, males of some species with integument and hairs yellow or testaceous.
Wing venation (long, slender marginal cell, second submarginal cell greatly narrowed costad)
distinguishes this genus from all others. Common or moderately common in tropics. Tropical
America, north throughout Antilles, Mexico, and USA to southem Canada (cosmopolitan). Nests
in burrows, usually made by the bees, in wood or stems. All species are polylectic. Spear-like
galeae are commonly used to pierce tubular corollas facilitating nectar robbing. Revisions: Hurd
(1955, species north of Mexico; 1961, Xylocopoides; 1978b, Stenoxylocopa); O'Brien and Hurd
(1965, Notoxylocopa). See list of species, Hurd (1978a). (couplet 93)
Family Colletidae
Glossa short, broadly truncate to bifid. Labial palpus with segments similar, none of them
elongate and sheathlike.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. This family is most
abundant and diverse in Australia and South America. In Australia,50o/o of native bee species
are in the family Colletidae (Houston 2018). Colletid diversity in North and Central America is,
by comparison, limited. Two genera (Colletes and Hylaeus) comprise the bulk of colletid
diversity in our area. In addition to Colletinae and Hylaeinae, three additional subfamilies are
represented in North and Central America: Diphaglossinae (three genera), Neopasiphaeinae
(Eulonchopria) and Xeromelissinae (Chilicola).Phylogenetic studies of the family include
Almeida and Danforth (2009) and Almeida et al. (2012, 2019). For a review of nesting biology
see Almeida (2008). Colletids are unique among bees in lining their brood cells with a
"cellophane" coating derived from the Dufour's gland. Females provision their brood cells with a
liquid mix of nectar and pollen that is likely rich in fermentative yeasts (Almeida 2008, Danforth
et al. 2019). Among the colletid bees distributed in the region, there are no social nor brood
parasite species, although several colletids are hosts of Nomadinae (Apidae). Colletinae
99. Colletes Latreille: Rather small to moderate-sized or a few rather large; moderately hairy,
andreniform [Fig. ai7] to apiform, usually with pale tergal hair bands, superficially similar to
Halictus and Andrena but with head in facial view more tapering below, inner orbits of eyes
converging strongly below; glossa short and shallowly bilobed and metasoma more strongly
tapering posteriorly?. Common in our area with over 140 described species; boreal to deserts to
moist tropics (cosmopolitan except Australia). Nests excavated in soil. The majority of species
are polylectic, but many oligolectic on wide range of families including Asteraceae, Solanaceae,
Fabaceae, Ericaceae, Campanulaceae, Sapotaeeae, and Malvaceae. Revision: Stephen (1954),
USA and Canadian species; Balboa et al. (2017 ) revised part of the Mexican and Central
American fauna. (couplet 25)
This is the only genus of bees with the second recurrent vein arcuate distad in its posterior half
[Fig. 79]. See Ferrari et al. (2020) and Ferrari & Packer (2020) for recent phylogenetic studies of
Colletes.
Diphaglossinae: Caupolicanini
100. Caupolicana Spinola: Large or very large; apiform or euceriform [Fig. 418], with bifid
glossa, hairy, sometimes with strong white hair bands on terga. Uncommon in southwestem
USA, otherwise rare. Drier parts of neotropical region; in our area Greater Antilles, Puebla north
to Arizona, Kansas, and North Carolina; absent in moist tropics except for Costa Rica (Hanson et
al.2021). These are large, fast-flying, crepuscular bees. Nests excavated in soil. Floral hosts
poorly known but most seem to be polylectic.We recognize Caupolicana in the broader sense of
Michener (2007), which includes Zikanapis as a subgenus. Revision: Michener (1966). (couplet
t7)
l0l. Crawfordapis Moure: Similar to Ptiloglossa but not metallic. Rare. Two species are
present at high altitudes from Panama to Mexico. Nests excavated in soil. (couplet i7)
102. Ptiloglossa Smith: Large, robust, hairy, apiform or euceriform [Fig. 419], with bifid glossa;
metasoma with weak bluish or greenish metallic tints. Uncornmon.Widespread in American
tropics north through Mexico to southern Arizona. Flight mostly at dawn. Nests excavated in
soil. Revision: None (couplet 16)
Diphaglossinae: Dissoglottini (synonym: Mydrosomini)
103. Mydrosomo Smith: Moderate size, moderately hairy, andreniform, glossa bifid; metasoma
usually with faint bluish or greenish tint. Rare. Nests unknown. Widespread in Arnerican tropics,
north in Mexico to Sinaloa. Revision: Michener (1986c). (couplets 15 and 124)
At least one species flies principally in late afternoon. Because of variation among species in
wing venation, this genus appears twice in the Key to the Genera; see couplet 14.v
v
v \,
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
\,
\,
v
v
\,
v
\,Hylaeinae
104. Hylaezs Fabricius: Minute to small; slender, non-hairy, hylaeiform [Fig. a20]; black or
rarely partly red, usually with limited yellow or white areas on face, thorax, and legs, rarely on
metasoma, sorne with red on metasoma; aspect that of small black wasp; glossa broadly truncate;
scopa of female entirely absent (pollen transported in crop). Common in temperate areas,
uncommon to rare in tropics. Boreal Canada to Panama and Antilles (cosmopolitan). Nests in
hollow twigs or stems, occasionally in preformed burrows in banks. All North American species
appear to be polylectic. Some Hawaiian species inferred to be brood parasites as they lack the
usual pollen collecting hairs on their fore-tarsi. (Daly & Magnacca2003). Revisions: Snelling
(1966b, 1968,1970), Daly (1973); none of these papers covers Mesoamerican species
adequately; Hawaiian species were revised by Daly & Magnacca (2003). (couplet 177)
The subfamily Hylaeinae, and the genus Hylaeus, are most diverse in Australia, their likely
place of origin (Almeida et al.2012; Kayaalp et aL.2013). Hylaeus is estimated to have dispersed
from Australia approximately 22 mrllion years ago (Kayaalp et al. 2013) and is now one of the
few cosmopolitan bee genera.
Neopasiphaeinae (formerly referred to as'oParacolletinae")
105. Eulonchopria Brdthes: Small to moderate-sized; coarsely sculptured, sparsely hairy,
robust andreniform or apiform, with yellow integumental tergal bands; forewings often folded
longitudinally like those of vespid wasps (Danforth and Michener 1988). Uncommon. Xeric
neotropical regions, South America, Nicaragua to western Mexico (Oaxaca to Nayarit), north to
southern Arizona. Nests unknown but presumbly excavated in soil. Usually associated with
rnimosoid legumes. Revisions: Michener (1963,1985b). (couplet 123)
Xeromelissinae (synonym: Chilicolinae)
106. Chilicola Spinola: Minute to small; slender, nonhairy, hylaeiform; black, without yellow
marks except on clypeus of some males; glossa broadly truncate; scopa limited, sparse on hind
femora and perhaps tibiae, better developed on S1-S3 (especially S2). Uncommon in our area.
Neotropical, in xeric or montane regions, north to states of Hidalgo and Jalisco, also Lesser
Antilles. Nests in stems and holes in wood. Revisions: Michener (199$; Toro and Michener
(1975). See Packer (2008) and Almeida et al. (2008) for phylogenetic analyses of
Xeromelissinae. Packer (2008) provides a revised subgeneric classification and a key to the
subgenera of Chilicola. (couplet 177)
Family Halictidae
Glossa short to rather long, pointed, without flabellum. Labial palpus with segments similar,
none of thern elongate and sheathlike or first sometimes elongate. Mentum membranous; lorum
weakly sclerotized or sclerotized only laterally; mentum and lorum not forming lobe projecting
behind proboscis (Michener 1985a). Lacinia a small lobe on base of proboscis, well separated from rest of maxilla (Michener and Greenberg 1985). One subantennal suture. Facial fovea
absent, See Moure and Hurd (1987) for a catalog of species of the Western Hemisphere.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. The family Halictidae
includes a diverse array of solitary, communal, semisocial, primitively eusocial, brood parasitic
and socially parasitic species. The largest genus, Lasioglossum,includes over 400 species in
North America and is a model for understanding the evolution of social behavior in bees (Gibbs
et aL.2012). Molecular phylogenetic studies have provided a powerful tool for understanding
phylogenetic relationships among subfamilies, tribes, and genera in this difficult group (Danforth
et al.2004,2008, Patiny et al. 2008, Gibbs et al.2012).
Halictinae: Augochlorini
The tribe Augochlorini was originally revised by Eickwort (1969) and, later, Engel (2000). The
phylogeny of Augochlorini was analyzed most recently by Gongalves (2016) based on molecular
and morphological data. We follow the Gongalves (2016) generic classification below.
107. Andinaugochlora Eickwort: Moderate-sized (8-10 mm long); andreniform; bright metallic
green or red, rather hairy bees, often with brassy or blue reflections or a metallic red metasoma.
They are similar to Neocotynura-and may prove to be derived from it-but differ in the lack of
any pronotal or anterior scutal modifications and in the nonpetiolate metasoma of males. The
paraocular lobe is less obtuse than Neocotynura. Revision: A single species (A. centralpina),
reported from Costa Rica and known only from the male, occurs in our area (Engel and Smith-
Pardo 2004). (couplets ## [a] and## [i] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
108. Aagochloro Smith: Small to moderate-sized; andreniform; bright green or blue, in some
tropical species with brassy or red, or almost entirely purple or black. Common; many
neotropical species. Tropical America north through the Antilles and tropical Mexico to eastem
and central USA and southem Canada; less common in desertic areas and western USA. This is
the largest genus of Augochlorini in our area. The subgenus Augochlora Smith s.s/r. consists of
solitary and primitively eusocial bees that nest in rotting wood. The subgenus Oxystoglossella
Eickwort consists of ground-nesting, primitively eusocial species. Lepeco & Gonzalez (2022)
provide a phylogenetic analysis of the species with an examination of nesting and sociality.
Revision:None, for US species, see Sandhouse (1937), Mitchell (1960). (couplets ## t?] and##
[i] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
709. Augochlorello Sandhouse: Small; andreniform; bright metallic green, bluish, or brassy;
often smaller than Augochlora but larger than Pereirapis. Uncommon in deserts but common
elsewhere. Widespread in neotropics; uncommon in Central America, north through Mexico,
USA, southern Canada, absent from Antilles. Eusocial in small colonies. Revision: Ordway
(1966), US species: Coelho (2004). (couplets ## L?l and ## [j.] in the Key to Genera of
Halictinae)
110. Augochloropsis Cockerell: Small to moderate-sized or even large; apiform; bright green or
some tropical species with red metasoma or body black; more robust than Augochlorella and
Augochlora lFig. a32]. Distinct from other augochlorine genera based on shape of tegula (innerv
Y v
\,
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
\,
v
vedge emerginate with posterior angle produced; Fig. 172)) and presence of stiff, simple bristles
on the apical margins of T1 and T2. Common; many species in tropics. Tropical America north
throughout eastern and central USA to southern Canada, west to Arizona, absent from Antilles.
Most species are believed to be solitary but Coelho (2002) reported that Augochloropsis zrzs is
primitively eusocial and Gibbs (2017) reported evidence for division of labor in an A. metallica
fulgida nest. Revision: None; for US species, see Mitchell (1960). (couplets ## t?l and## [J'] in
the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
lll. Caenaugochlora Michener: Moderate-sized or small; andreniform; bright metallic green or
brassy. Long hairs on eyes of most species suggest hairy-eyed Caenohalictini such as
Caenohalictus, from which it differs in tribal characters (couplet 54). Uncommon. Tropical
America, north into Mexico as far as San Luis Potosi and Sinaloa. Revision: Subgenus
Ctenoaugochlora treated by Engel (1996). (couplets ## t?l and## [i] in the Key to Genera of
Halictinae)
112. ChlerogellaMichener: Slender andreniform; varying from largely testaceous with
greenish tints to dark blue-green, the metasoma sometimes black; marginal cell pointed at apex.
Very rare. Andean region, mountainous areas of Panama, Costa Rica. (couplets ## [Q] and ##
[J] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
ll3. Megalopra Smith: Moderate-sized to rather large; andreniform [Fig. a33]; usually more or
less testaceous with bright metallic green reflections. Perhaps not uncommon but nocturnal and
rarely collected. Tropical America, north through Mexican tropics at least to Nayarit. Excavates
nests in rotting wood and vines. A single brood parasitic species, M. (Noctoraptor) byroni Engel,
Brooks and Yanega(1997) is known from Panama (Biani and Wcislo 2007). Revision: None.
(couplets ## l?l and ## [J'] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
174. MegaloptillaHwd and Moure: Moderate-sized; andreniform; brown with metasoma and
parts of mesosoma yellow-orange or with metallic reflections. Pronotum dorsolateral angle
carinate and strongly produced but without carina below angle. Inner metatibial spur ciliate. Part
of the Neocorynura grouip, most closely related to the South American Paroxystoglossa Moure.
Only one species (M. byronel/a) occurs in our area (Panama). Revision: Engel and Brooks
(1999). (couplets ## [a] and## [d] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
l15. MegaloptinaEickwort: Small; andreniform; superficially like Augochlora or
Augochlorella. Megaloptina shares an elongate, slender proboscis (see Michener 2007, Fig. 67-
4b) that fits into an unusually narrow proboscidial fossa with several other, mostly South
American genera (Megaloptidia grotp). Treated as a subgenus of Megommation Moure by
Michener but applied at the generic level by Moure (2007) and Gongalves (201 6). Two
subgenera (Cleptommation and Megaloptina s.s.) occur, each with a single species in our area
(from Costa Rica and Panama). Megaloptina is a pollen-collecting bee whereas Cleptommation
lacks a scopa and is presumed to be a brood parasite (Michener 2007). Cleptommationhasbeen
considered a distinct genus (Engel 2013), but it likely renders Megaloptina paraphyletic
(Gongalves 2016). Revision: for Cleptommation (Engel 2013). (couplets ## t?l and## [,3] in the
Key to Genera of Halictinae) l16. Neocorynuro Schrottky: Moderate-sized; females andreniform [Fig. 435], males with
metasoma attenuate basally (petiolate) lFig. a3q as in Habralictus, which consists of much
smaller species; bright green to largely black, often with wings darkened. Sometimes common.
Widespread in tropical America north to Lesser Antilles and through tropical Mexico to San Luis
Potosi. Species in our area belonging to the subgenus Neocorynura s.str. Certain species (in
South America) nest in wood, but others nest in soil. Revision: None. (couplets ## t?] and##
[C] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
117. Pereirapis Moure: Minute; andreniform; bright metallic green, commonly with blackish
metasoma. Common; there is disagreement if Pereirapis is a single variable species or as many
as eight (Michener 2007; Moure 2007). Tropical America northward through tropical Mexico to
Jalisco; records from Hispaniola. Michener (2007) treats Pereirapis as a subgenus of
Augochlorellabut recent phylogenetic studies (Gongalves 2016) indicate that it is a distinct
genus. Revision: None. (couplets ## lQj and## [J] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
l18. Pseudaugochlora Michener: Rather large (8-13 mm); andreniform; bright metallic green
or bluish with posterior margins of terga black or body entirely black. Widespread in tropical
America, north to Lesser Antilles and through tropical Mexico to Sinaloa and southernmost
Texas. Revision: None. (couplets ## lal and ## [d,] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
The name Pseudaugochloropsis Michener has also been applied to this group.
l19. Temnosomo Smith: Small to moderate-sized; andreniform; brilliant green to blue, coarsely
punctate [Fig. a36]; bases of metasomal terga depressed (constricted as seen in profile). Rare
with just one known species in our area. Widespread in American tropics, north to San Luis
Potosi and southern Arizona, also Antilles. Brood parasitic, probably on other Augochlorini.
Revision: None. (couplets ## l?1 and ## [J'] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
Halictinae: Caenohalictini
Phylogeny of Caenohalictini was most recently analyzed by Gongalves & Melo (2010)
120. Agopostemon Guerin-Meneville: Moderate-sized to large; andreniform [Fi_es. 437 and
438]; eyes bare or nearly so; head and thorax bright green, rarely blue or blackish; metasoma of
female green, testaceous, or black, of male almost always with strong, transverse, yellow
integumental bands. Common in temperate region, uncommon in tropics. This is the largest and
most common genus of Caenohalictini in our area. Polylectic, nests excavated in soil. Roberts
(1969) provides a review of biology. Southem Canadathrough Mexico and Antilles to South
America. Revision: Roberts (1972); Janjic & Packer (2003) conducted a phylogenetic analysis of
the genus. (couplets ## ta] and ## [j'] in the Key ro Genera of Halictinae)
l2l. Agapostemonoides Roberts and Brooks: Moderate-sized; andreniform; head and thorax
bright green; metasoma black to red-brown with basal yellow ter-eal bands in both sexes, often
largely hidden by preceding terga; posterior surface ofpropodeum enclosed by carina as in
Agapostemon, dorsal surface over 1.5 times as long as metanofum. Rare; one species in our area,
A. hurdi Roberts and Brooks. South America to Costa Rica. See Roberts and Brooks ( 1987).
While sometimes treated as a subgenus of Agapostemon (e.g., Michener 2007), the phylogeny ofY
v
v
v
V v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
\,
v
v
v
vJanjic & Packer (2003) indicates that Agapostemonoides is a distinct genus. (couplets ## [Q] and
## l4l in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
122. Caenohalictus Cameron: Small to moderate; andreniform; strongly metallic bronze,
green, or blue; superficially resembling small Augochlorini. Caenohalictus differs from
Augochlorini in the tribal characters (couplet 54) and from most Augochlorini in having
conspicuously hairy eyes. Rare; only one known species in our area. Neotropical, abundant in
temperate South America and Andes, ranging north to San Luis Potosi and Nayarit. Revision:
None. (couplets ## [?] and## [C] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
123. Dinogapostemon Moure and Hurd: Rather large; andreniform; with hairy eyes; females
not brilliantly metallic; male flagellar segments each arched, so that flagellum appears strongly
crenulate. Rare; six species. Highlands, Colombia, Central America, and Mexico north to
Tamaulipas. Revision: Roberts and Brooks (19S7). (couplets ## t?l and## [d'] in the Key to
Genera of Halictinae)
124. Habralictus Moure: Small to minute; females andreniform; males with basal metasomal
segments long and slender, so that metasoma is petiolate as in Neocorynura; head and thorax
minutely sculptured, rather dull, brassy or strongly metallic green; metasoma nonmetallic, in
female flattened, usually with yellow integumental bands or lateral spots. Rare in our area
(common in some South American countries); few species. Neotropical, ranging north in tropics
to Jalisco and the Lesser Antilles. Revision: None. (couplets ## t?] and## [C] in the Key to
Genera of Halictinae)
125. Paragapostemon Vachal: Rather large; andreniform; brilliantly metallic green, blue to
purple with hairy eyes and, in the male, enlarged hind legs. Differs from large green
Augochlorini not only in tribal characters (couplet 54) but in long hairs of eyes. Rare; one
species, P. coelestinezs (Westwood). Highlands, Oaxaca to Nuevo Leon. Revision: Roberts and
Brooks (1987). (couplets ## t?l and## [c'] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
Halictinae: Halictini
Phylogeny of the tribe Halictini was most recently analyzed by Gibbs et al. (2012).
127. Halictus Latreille: Small to rather large; andreniform [Figs. 439 and 440]; weakly metallic
greenish or not metallic. Differs from Lasioglossum females and some males in strong distal
venation of forewing (couplet 55); unlike Lasioglossum,both sexes have strong apical pale tergal
hair bands. Common. Canada through whole USA and Mexico to Central America and Antilles,
continuing into South America (holarctic and African). Most nests are primitively eusocial, with
some reversions to solitary nesting. Revisions: Sandhouse 09aD; Wille and Michener (1971),126. RhinetulaFrrese: Moderate size; andreniform [Fig. aa3]; scarcely metallic, with hairy
eyes; relatedto Parogapostemon. Propodeum wholly declivous. Rare; one species in our area, R.
denticrus Friese. Occurs as far north as Honduras in lowland forests; crepuscular. See Roberts
and Brooks (1987). (couplets ## [?] and ## [i] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae) tropical species; see also Janjic and Packer (2001). (couplets ## L?l and## [d'] in the Key to
Genera of Halictinae)
128. Lasioglossum Curtis: Minute to moderate-sized; andreniform [Figs. 441 and 442f,males
often slender; black or dull green or blue, in Antilles rarely bright green; metasoma sometimes
yellow to red but usually brown or occasionally dull metallic. Weakened distal veins of forewing
(Fig. ##) characteristic only of this genus. Weakening of veins often not or scarcely perceptible
in males. Basal tergal bands or basal lateral patches of pale hair (tomentum) commonly present
and pale hair may spread over much of tergal surface; apical bands, such as occur in Halictus,
are not found in American Lasioglossum. Abrtndant, the most common genus of bees in most
north temperate localities; there are nearly 400 species in our area. Boreal to tropical
(cosmopolitan). The great majority of species have three submarginal cells but a few species (in
subgenera Dialictus, Habralictellus and Hemihalictrzs) have two submarginal cells. (couplets ##
IQ] and ## l,l in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
The subgeneric classification of Lasioglossum has been extraordinarily difficult to resolve and
highly unstable. Gibbs (Gibbs 201 8 and Gibbs et al. 2013) recently developed a classification
based on a robust phylogeny for the genus that recognizes 8 subgenera in North America:
Lasioglossum s.str., Leucalictus, Dialictus, Eickwortia, Evylaeus, Hemihalictus, Sphecodogastra,
and Habralictellus. The latter is likely a deriviativ e of Hemihalictus s. /. Socially parasitic species
previously placed in Paralictus are polyphletic and now included within Dialictus.ln general,
the subgenera Dialictus, Erylaeus, and Sphecodogastra include many primitively eusocial
species whereas the other subgenera include mostly solitary species. Females in the vast majority
of Lasioglosszrz species nest in the soil but a few species of Dialictus have switched to nesting
in soft, pulpy, rotting wood (e.g., Lasioglossum lDialictusl coeruleum). For keys to the species
within our area, see: McGinley (1986) for Lasioglossutn sensu stricto; Gibbs (2010 and201l) for
Dialictus in Canada and eastern North America; Gardner and Gibbs (2020) for Dialictus in
westem North America with pale metasoma; Gibbs et aL.2013 for Evylaeus, Hemihalictus, and
Sphecodogastra (s.1.) in eastern North America; McGinley (2003) for nocturnal, crepuscular and
matinal Sphecodogasrra (s.str.). Caribbean species have been treated by island in several papers
by Gibbs, Genaro or Engel.
Key to the subgenera of Lasioglossum in North America (111912022)
Modified from Michener (2007), McGinley (1986), and Gibbs et al. (2013).
a. Second submarginal crossvein (1rs-m) as strong as first (second abscissa of Rs), difficult to
see in male; head and mesosoma black (except L. pavonotum (Cockerell)).........
- Second submarginal crossvein (1rs-m) weaker than first (second abscissa of Rs), at least in
female; head and mesosoma variable in colour
b(a). Propodeum with lateral carina well developed, reaching dorsal surface with the following
combination dorsal surface coarsely sculptured, shorter than scutellum; Tl without basal hair
band; head long (length/width ratio : 0.88-1.0); male gonostylus without retrorse lobe....b
cV
v
v
v
V
v
Y........ L. (Leuchal ictus) \,
v
v
\,
V
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
v
Y
v- Propodeum with lateral carina usually poorly developed, not reaching dorsal surface, but if
strong then without combination above, i.e. dorsal surface longer than scutellum or weakly
sculptured or if strongly sculptured then T1 with basal hair band or head short (length/width ratio
:0.77-0.89); male gonostylus with retrorse lobe ..........L. (Las ioglossum)
c(a). Head and mesosoma metallic (green, blue or golden), at least in part..
- Head and mesosoma black-brown......... ... f.d
o
.hd(c). Head and mesosoma brilliant metallic (Caribbean); male inner metatibial spur typically
pectinate; male gonostylus without retrorse lobe........... ..L. (Habralictellus)
- Head and mesosoma dull metallic; male inner metatibial spur ciliate; male gonostylus with
retrorse lobe ........ ..e
e(d). Body size usually small (4-6 mm); female Tl usually with appressed hairs at least laterally,
typically lacking erect hairs medially; female mandible almost always with small preapical tooth;
propodeum usually with weak lateral carina .........L. (Dialictus)
- Body size usually larger (6-8 mm); female T1 without appressed hairs, medially with distinct
erect hairs; female mandible often strongly bidentate (primarily Mesoamerica except L. aquilae),
if preapical tooth small, then propodeum with strong lateral carina........ L. (Eichuortia s.l.)
f (c). Head wide; female inner metatibial spur with fine oblique teeth, not as tall as width of main
rachis; male gonostylus without retrorse lobe; metasomal sterna with erect pubescence
L. (Evylaeus)
- Head usually longer; female inner metatibial spur usually with longer, nalrow or fat teeth,
often taller than width of main rachis basally; male gonostylus with retrorse lobe; metasomal
sterna with variable pubescence
g(f). Female mandible strongly bidentate, subapical tooth nearly equal to apical one; male
gonobase at middorsum less than one-fourth length of gonocoxite (Mesoamerica)
.L. (Eickwortia s.s.)
- Female mandible with small preapical tooth dorsally; male gonobase at middorsum usually
more than one-third length of gonocoxite
h(g). Either propodeum with weak lateral carina and fully developed scopa or mesosoma
coarsely sculptured on pleuron and carina appearing to reach dorsal surface; male metasomal
sterna with erect pubecence; male antennae relatively short; male heads sometimes enlarged with
long mandibles........... . L. (Hemihalictus)
- Either propodeum with weak lateral carina and highly modified reduced scopa or mesosoma
weakly rugose at most and propodeum with complete carina; male antennae relatively long; male
heads not en1arged................ .....L. (Sphecodogastra)
129. Mexoliclzs Eickwort: Small to moderate sized (6-12mm in length); slender andreniform;
usually weakly metallic green, blue to purple, some extensively pale brown; integument dull,
finely roughened; wings elongate. Resembles rather large, slender species of Lasioglossum
(Dialictus) but differs in strong wing venation and serrate rather than pectinate inner hind tibial spur of female. Rare. Panama to southern Arizona in high elevation cloud forests ranging from
1600m-3500m in altitude (Eickwort 1978). Floral associations are poorly known. Revision:
Dumesh 2013. (couplets ## t?l and## [i] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
Halictinae: Sphecodini
All members of the tribe Sphecodini are brood or social parasites of solitary, communal, and
primitively social bees (Danforth et al. 2019). Gongalves (2021) provides a revised generic
classification of the tribe Sphecodini with a key to genera recognized in his classification. Our
classification differs, as noted below.
130. Microsphecodes Eickwort and Stage: Similar to minute Sphecodes in appearance but often
paler in color; sculpturing often weaker than usual in Sphecodes; free part of marginal cell three
times as long as part subtended by submarginal cells. Rare. Widespread in neotropical region, as
far north as Guatemala (Packer et al. in press?). Brood parasites or social parasites in nests of
other small Halictini, namely Lasioglossum (Dialictus) and Habralictus. A phylogeny by
Habermannov6 et al. (2013) suggests that Microsphecodes arose from within Austrosphecodes, a
Neotropical lineage of Sphecodes s./. Due to its current usage and distinctive form, we recognize
Microsphecodes here at the generic level until a more robust classification is available. Revision:
None. (couplets ## L?l and## [c'] in the Key to Genera of Halictinae)
13l. Nesosphecodes Engel. Small to moderate-sized; andreniform; similar to Microsphecodes
but are generally larger, without yellow markings, and free part of marginal cell two times as
long as part subtended by submarginal cells. Rare. Three described species from the Greater
Antilles.. Revision: Engel (2006).
132- Ptilocleptis Michener: Small, andreniform; body black and extensively covered with pale
plumose hair; surface is less coarsely sculptured than usual in Sphecodes. Very rare; only one
described species in our arca (Ptilocleptis tomentosa). Widespread in neotropics, north to Nuevo
Leon. Brood parasitic. Host-associations are poorly known but potentially attack Augochlorini
(Michener 2007). Revision: Michener (1978). (couplets ## t?] and## [d'] in the Key to Genera
of Halictinae)
133. SphecodesLatreille: Minute to moderate-sized; andreniform lFig.4aal; black with
metasoma partly or wholly red in females and many males; sparsely haired, terga shiny, without
hair bands; punctation of most species very coarse, as is pitting at base of propodeum. Extremely
broad head (couplet 52) is distinctive. Common in temperate regions, uncommon in tropics.
Boreal to tropical, Canada to Panama and Antilles (cosmopolitan). Sphecodes s./. is rendered
paraphyleticby Microsphecodes and Eupetersza (Habermannovd et al. 2013) and likely other
taxa in the tribe. Austt'osphecodes and Melissocleptis Gongalves (new slmonymy) are included
within ot;rr Sphecodes s.l. Some characters used to define Melissoclepris, like the short scape, also
occur in temperate species of Sphecodes. Brood parasites in nests of other Halictinae, Iess
commonly in nests of Andrena and Perdita. Revision: None. (couplets ## [9] and## [j] in the
Key to Genera of Halictinae)
Most species have three submarginal cells, but a few have only two (couplet ##). Several
groups appear to be subgenerically distinct, but the subgenera remain unresolved.V
V
Y
v
v
v
V v
v
\,
\,
v
vNomiinae
The subfarnily Nomiinae includes solitary or communal, ground-nesting bees. They are most
diverse in the Old-World tropics with many genera in tropical Africa and Asia (Michener 2007)
In our area, we have only two genera'. Dieunomia (tribe Dieunomiini) and Nomia (tribe
Nomiini). Bossert et al. (2021) published a phylogeny of Nomiinae which supports the two
tribes.
134. Dieunomia Cockerell: Moderate-sized to large; andreniform; usually with apical tergal hair
bands, without colored integumental bands; metasoma sometimes partly or wholly red. Common
in central and southwestern USA, elseu,here uncommon. Nests excavated in soil, all oligolectic
on Asteraceae. Southem Canada, USA except northeast, south to Jalisco. Revision: Blair (1935)
for Dieunomia s.str., Cross (1958) for subgenus Epinomia. (couplet 36)
135. Nomia Latreille: Moderate-sizedto large; apiform or andreniform [Figs. 445 and446];
somewhat hairy; terga without hair bands, with apical, hairless, blue, green, or yellowish
integumental bands. Nests excavated in soil, all polylectic. Nomia melanderi is managed for
alfalfa pollination. Common, western USA, elsewhere in our area uncommon. USA south to
Veracruz and Guerrero, not or scarcely in tropics; Antilles (cosmopolitan except South America)
Revision: Ribble (1965). (couplet 36)
Nomia and Dieunomia can be run through either couplets 35 or 121 in the Key to the Genera
because it is difficult to decide on the proper course at couplet 26.
Rophitinae
Members of the subfamily Rophitinae are distinct from other halictid bees in the placement of
the antennae low on the face (Michener 2007). They are all ground-nesting, solitary or
communal bees. Most species are naffow host-plant specialists on a variety of plant families (see
below). We follow the tribal classification of Patiny et al. (2008) below.
Rophitinae : Con anthalictini
736. Conanthalictus Cockerell: Small to minute; andreniform; blackish or greenish, with dull,
minutely roughened, scarcely punctate integument. Rather uncommon. Texas, Utah to Califomia
and Baja California Norte, principally on flowers of Hydrophyllaceae. Revision: Timberlake
(1961). (couplet 40)
Rophitinae: Rophitini
137. DufoureuLepeletier: Small to moderate-sized; andreniform [Figs. 447 and 448] to slender
andreniform; black to metallic bluish or greenish, rarely with red metasoma, sometimes with pale
tergal hair bands. Not uncommon in western and central USA, elsewhere rare. Canada, USA,
Mexican desert and plateau south to Oaxaca (holarctic). North American species of Dufourea are
oligolectic on a wide variety of plant families including Asteraceae, Boraginaceae,
Campanulaceae, Caprifoliaceae, Hydrophyllaceae, Lamiaceae, Liliaceae, Malvaceae, Phrymaceae, Polemoniaceae, Pontederiaceae, and Rosaceae. Revision: Canadian species,
Dumesh & Sheffield (2012). (couplet 188)
138- Micralictoides Timberlake: Small to minute; andreniform; sometimes with red metasoma,
without tergal hair bands. Uncommon. Nevada, Arizona, Southern California and no doubt
northem Baja California. Species are oligolectic on diverse host-plants, including Chaenactis
(Asteraceae), Allium (Amaryllidaceae), Gilia and Navarretia (Polemoniaceae), and
Eschscholtzia (Papaveraceae) (Bohart and Griswold 1987). Revisions: Bohart Q9a\; Bohart and
Griswold (1987). (couplet 189)
Rophitinae: Xeralictini
139. ProtodufoureoTimberlake: Small; andreniform. Rare. California and Arizona, may occur
in Baja Califomia. Females are oligolectic on flowers of Phacelia and Emmenanthe
(Hydrophyllaceae). Revision: Timberlake (l 955a). (couplet 39)
140. Sphecodosoma Crawford: Minute; andreniform; commonly with red metasoma in females
Rare. Southeastern Kansas, Oklahoma, and westem Texas to southern California, U.S,A., and
south to the state of Oaxaca, Mexico. Females are oligolectic on Nama (Hydrophyllaceae).
Revision: Timberlake (1961), as subgenus of Conanthalictus. (couplet 40)
141. Xeraliclzs Cockerell: Large (11-12.5 mm); andreniform; blackish or partly reddish. Rare.
Deserts of California, Nevada, and Baja Califomia. Females are oligolectic on Mentzelia and
Eucnide (Loasaceae). Revision: Snelling and Stage (1995b). (couplet 37)
Family Megachilidae
Proboscis as in Apidae. One subantennal suture. Facial fovea absent. Labrum longer than broad
and widened to broad articulation with clypeus. Two submarginal cells in forewing, usually
about equal in length. Pygidial plate usually absent.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. Megachilidae
includes both solitary and brood parasitic groups. Among the solitary species there is an
extraordinary diversity of nesting habits, including wood-nesters, stem and cavity nesters that use
leaves, flower petals, plant fibers, and resins to build their nests, and even above-ground builders
that use resins, sand, and stones (Danforth et a|.2019 provides an overview of the varied nesting
habits in this family). Floral preferences range from broadly polylectic species to narrow host-
plant specialists. The phylogeny and classification of Megachilidae has undergone significant
revisions due to analyses of morphological and molecular data. Higher level classification was
revised by Litman et al. (201 1) and Gonzalez el al. (2012). Generic relationships in Osmiini were
teanalyzedby Praz et al. (2008), in Anthidiini by Litman et al. (2016), and in Megachilini by
Trunz et al. (2016) . We follow these studies in our classification of North and Central American
bees (Table 2-1). v
v
v
v
\,
v
\,
v
v
v
v
v
v
vLithurginae
142. Lithurgapsis Fox: Moderate-sized to Iargg megachiliform [Figs. 451 and 452], females
usually and males sometimes with facial prominence at level of upper margin of clypeus; hind
tibia of female spiculate. Uncommon; usually in xeric areas; South Dakota to Costa Rica,
Antilles, continuing south in temperate regions to Argentina. Nests excavated in pithy stems or
soft wood. Oligolectic on Opuntia and similar cacti. Nests in burrows in wood. Revisions:
Snelling (1983, 1986b). (couplet 195)
143. Lithurgzs Latreille: Similar to Lithurgopsis. Lithurgus chtltsurus is introduced from
Europe and now present in the eastern USA. Lithurgus chrysurus are specialists on Centaurea
(Asteraceae). Nesting biology and behavior of North American populations of Lithurgus
chrysurus have been described by Rozen and colleagues (Rust et aL.2004, Rozen 2013, Rozen &
Wyman 2014).
Megachilinae : Anthidiini
144. Anthidiellum Cockerell: Moderate-sized, very robust megachiliform [Fig. 453], black or
sometimes red with yellow markings. Differs from all other North American anthidiines by
shoft, robust body. Uncommon in western USA, otherwise rare. Southern Canada, all parts of
USA and Mesoamerica, including the tropics (cosmopolitan except Australia, depending on
generic lirnits). Nests of resin constructed in the open. Our species are in the subgenus
LoyolanthidiumUrban Revisions: Schwarz (1926b), USA and Canadian species; Grigarick and
Stange (1968), Californian species; Urban (2001) as Loyolanthidium. (couplet ## in Key to
Genera of Anthidiini)
145. AnthidiumFabricius: Moderate-sized to large, broad-bodied, rather squarish
megachiliform [Fig. 454], with yellow markings, usually extensive. The multiple, close-set
mandibular teeth of the female distinguish this genus from all others in our area except the
adventive Pseudoanthidium. Widely distributed from Canada, Alaska, southward through
western and central USA (adventive A. manicatum and A. oblongatunt extend the range to the
east coast) and Mesoamerica; also present in South America (cosmopolitan except Australia).
Nest cells of plant hairs in small cavities in wood, in sterns, in or between stones, in soil or rarely
excavated in soil. All native species are in Anthidium s.str. Revisions: Grigarick and Stange
(1968), Califomian species; Gonzalezand Griswold (2013), Westem Hemisphere species.
(couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
146. Anthodioctes Holmberg: Small (4.5-10.5 mm long) heriadiform to slender megachiliform
bees, coarsely punctate with strongly developed carinae and foveae, dark species, usually with
rather limited yellow markings. Uncommon. Neotropics, ranging into arid subtropics of Mexico,
north to Tamaulipas, Chihuahua, and Sinaloa. Resin nests in small pre-existing cavities in wood,
stones, and so forth. Species in our area are all in the subgenus Anthodioctes s. str. Revisions:
Urban (1998, 1999). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini) 747. Austrosrelis Michener and Griswold: Small heriadiform bees; flat projection at the apex of
the hind tibia of the female is a unique feature of this genus. Rare. This mostly South American
group ranges northward to central Mexico (San Luis Postosi). Austt"ostelis was originally treated
as a subgenus of Hoplosfe/rs (Michener & Griswold 1994) but has since been elevated to generic
status by Michener (2007). Like other brood parasitic anthidiines (Hoplostelis, Rhynostehs, and
Stelis), female Austrostelis lack a scopa. Hosts are largely unknown, except for one confirmed
record of Austrostelis catamarcensis emerging from nests of Epanthidium tigrinum (Zanella &
Ferreira 2005). Revision: Parizotto et al. (2018); see also Michener and Griswold (1994).
(couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
748. Aztecanthidium Michener and Ordway: Large, rather elongate megachiliform [Figs. 455
and 4561, black or red with limited yellow or whitish markings. Rare. Oaxaca to Puebla and
Nayarit. Revisions: Michener and Ordway Q96$; Snelling (1987). (couplet ## in Key to Genera
of Anthidiini)
149. Dianthidium Cockerell: Small to moderate-sized, rarely large (subgenls Mecanthidium),
megachiliform [Fig. 457),yellow to white and black, or in Mecanthidium often red. T7 of male
curled under, usually with small, short, blunt or truncate median lobe and broad lateral lobes, but
in some members of subgenus Adanthidium, tergal margin scarcely lobate or median lobe
longest, and in subgenus Mecanthidium,median lobe enormously elongate and lateral lobes
almost absent. Common in western USA, elsewhere uncommon. Southern Canada to Oaxaca.
Nests constructed of pebbles and resin, on stones or tree branches or in cavities in soil.
Revisions: Schwarz (1926b), Timberlake (1943), Grigarick and Stange (1968); all relate
primarily to species of Dianthidium s.str. found north of Mexico: Mecanthidium,Tanner et al
(2009). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
Dianthidiurn comes out twice in the key because of differences among subgenera in the presence
or absence of the arolium. The subgenera are separated by the following key, modified from that
of Griswold and Michener (1988):
a. Hind coxa with elongate ventral apical spine in male, with short tooth (best seen in lateral
view) in female; hypostomal area dulled by fine, dense punctation. ..Dianthidium s.str.
- Hind coxa without tooth or spine; hypostomal area shiny between punctures...........................b
b(a). Arolia present; mouthparts in repose considerably exceeding proboscidial fossa..................c
- Arolia absent; mouthparts in repose scarcely exceeding proboscidial fossa (male S5 without
apical sclerotized comb) Deranchanthidium
c(b). Male S5 with apical sclerotized comb; female mandible short, length considerably less than
maximum clypeal width........ ................Adanthidium
- Male 55 without apical sclerotized comb; female mandible long, length equal to maximum
clypeal width .. Mecanthidium
150' Duckeanthidium Moure and Hurd: Large, robust, megachiliform bees (8.5 to 16.0 mm in
length); vary from wholly black to forms with extensive yellou,markings and the ground color
of the metasoma brown; juxtantennal carinae (see Fig. l0-3 in Michener 2007) are distinct,V
V
V \,
v
v
\,
v
v
\,
\,
\,unlike those of other large and robust American anthidiines; arolia well developed in males,
absent or nearly so in females; fovea with distinct margin behind propodeal spiracle. This mostly
South American group ranges northward to Costa Rica. The one species known from our area, D,
thielei, occupies cavity nests in the forest canopy and females are oligolectic on Bauhinia
(Fabaceae) (Thiele 2002). Rare; only one species (D. thielei) in our area. Revision: Michener
2002 [Urban 1995?]). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
l5l. Epanthidium Moure: Moderate-sized, rather elongate megachiliform, black with yellow or
whitish markings, aspect of an Aztecanthidium. Rare; only one species (E. boharti Strange) in
our area. Nuevo Leon to San Luis Potosi, Jalisco; other species in southem South America. Nests
unknown. Revision: Stange (1983). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
Our species, along with two from South America, belong to the subgenus Carloticola Moure
and Urban.
152. Hoplostelis Dominique: Moderate-sized, robust megachiliform, with extensive yellow
markings. Rare. American tropics, including Mexico as far north as Jalisco. Brood parasites of
Euglossa (Parizotto & Melo 2020). Revision: None. (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
Formerly called Odontostelis Cockerell; see Griswold and Michener (1988).
153. Hypanthidiodes Moure: Small to moderate-sized, megachiliforn or heriadiform, yellow
and black, resembling small Dianthidium, Hypanthidium, andAnthodioctes. This genus appears
twice in the key because the arolia are variable, usually absent in females and usually present in
males, although in one of our subgenera they are absent in both sexes. Rare. American tropics,
north to Chiapas. Revision: Saranthidium,Urban (1998); Anthidulum, Urban (1992). (couplet ##
in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
Of the nine subgenera (Michener 2007) only Anthidulum and Saranthidium are found in our
area. Because our subgenera are sometimes regarded as generically distinct, we differentiate
them as follows:
a. Arolia absent in both sexes; subantennal suture straight; 52 of male not enlarged; 55 of male
with apical sclerotized comb......... .......Saranthidium
- Arolia absent in female, present in male; subantennal suture arcuate; 52 of male enlarged,
following sterna largely hidden; S5 of male without apical comb ..........Anthidulum
154. Hypanthidium Cockerell: Moderate-sized, megachiliform, yellow and black, sirnilar in
aspect to Anthodioctes but less coarsely sculptured. Uncommon. Neotropical, including tropical
Mexico north to Tamaulipas and Sonora. Nests unknown. Hypanthidium s. str. is the only
subgenus in our area. Revision: Urban (1998). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
155. Paranthidium Cockerell and Cockerell: Moderate-sized, megachiliform, yellow to white
and black, resembling Dianthidium, apex of male abdomen often strongly curled under. Rare.
Widespread in USA and Mexico south to Panama. Evans (1993) described nests of Paranthidium
(P.) jugatorium perpictum.Females construct burrows in sandy soil, with cells, each made of a thin layer of resin or gum, in series in the burrows. The subgenera Paranthidium and
Rapanthidium occr)r in our area. Revision: Schwarz (1926b), US species only. (couplet ## in
Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
156. Pseudoanthidium Friese: Small-sized, yellow to white and black, resembling
Dianthidium, apex of male abdomen often strongly curled under. Female with multiple, close-set
mandibular teeth as in Anthidiun. A single species (P. nanum) introduced to the East Coast of
USA from Eurasia and apparently expanding westward; recorded from Illinois and Minnesota
Portman et al. (2019). Uncommon. Cavity nester with cells constructed of plant fibers.
Taxonomy: Portman et al. (2019). (couplet## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
157. Rhynoslelis Moure and Urban: Large (14 mm long), robust, striking black and yellow,
similar in appearan ce to Hoplostelis. Like other brood parasitic anthidiines, females lack a scopa.
Of the two species only R. multiplicata ranges beyond Brazil and French Guiana as far north as
Costa Rica (Hanson et al. 2021). Brood parasites of Eulaema (Parizotto & Melo 2020). Revision:
Parrizotto & Melo (2020). (couplet ## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
158. Stelis Panzer: Small to moderate-sized, megachiliform, black or metallic blue or green,
with or without yellow or white metasomal markings; sometimes (but rarely) mostly yellow.
Rare or, in westem USA, uncommon. Canada, throughout USA, south to the Mexican states of
Michoacan and Oaxaca (holarctic). Brood parasites of anthidiine, osmiine and megachiline bees
Revisions: For Dolichostelis, Parker and Bohart (1979); for Heterostelis,Thorp (1966). (couplet
## in Key to Genera of Anthidiini)
This genus appears twice in the key because of the presence or absence of pale metasomal
maculations.
159. TrochusaPanzer'.
Moderate-sizedto rather large, megachiliform [Fig. 459]; strong carinae absent; propodeal
foveae and basal pits absent except pronotal lobe sometimes with carina or lamella. Resin cells
in burrou's excavated in soil. Floral hosts poorly known for most species but some oligolectic on
Fabaceae, Asteraeae or Larrea (Zygophyllaceae). Uncommon in southwestern USA, rire
elsewhere. Central and southern USA, north to New Jersey, Michi-ean, and South Dakota, south
to Jalisco, Puebla, and Veracruz; not found in wet tropics (eastern hemisphere except Australia)..
Revisions: For Heteranthidium, Snelling (1966a), and Brooks and Griswold (1988); for
Trachusomimus, Grigarick and Stange (1968). (couplet ##; couplet ## inKey to Genera of
Anthidiini)
Because one subgenus is marked with abundant yellow markings that are reduced or lacking in
the others, this genus appears twice in the key. Some of the subgenera have previously been
given generic status (Griswold and Michener 1988). They differ as follows:
a. Head, thorax, and metasoma richly marked with cream color or yellow; colored bands on terga
pre-apical; tergal hair bands absent (arolia usually present but often extremely small, sometimeiabsent) Hercranthidium
- Yellow or cream markings absent except on face of male and sometimes narrow apical tergal
bands; metasoma hairy or with apical tergal hair bands, at least Iaterally..... ................bv v
v
v
\,
\,
v
v
v
vb(a). Arolia absent ....
- Arolia present......... Ulanthidium
c
c(b). Metasoma without pale integumental bands, with pale apical hair bands; S8 of male with
broad disc, ending in trilobed, hairy apex.......... Trachusomimus
- Metasomal terga with narrow, pale apical borders, sometimes faint or absent; hair bands
present only laterally; S8 of male with disc a transverse and almost hairless band, apex concave
..... Legnanthidium
Megachilinae: Dioxyini
160. Dioxys Lepeletier and Servile: Moderate-sized, megachiliform [Figs. 460 and 4611;
metasoma tapering to blunt apex, often red, terga with narrow apical bands of pale hair (except
one species covered with golden hair), prominent metanotal process. Rare. Western half of USA,
Baja California, and presumably elsewhere in northern Mexico (holarctic). Brood parasites of
Osmia in our area. Revision: Hurd (1958). (couplet 182)
Megachilinae: Megachilini
161. Coelioxys Latreille: Moderate-sized, megachiliform lFig. 4621, with metasoma tapering
apically, in female to sharp point, in male to several teeth; metasomal terga rarely red, usually
with transverse basal grooves and narrow white hair bands. Not uncommon. Boreal to tropical
regions (cosmopolitan). Brood parasites primarily of Megachile,but some on Centris and
Euglossa; in other continents reported also on Anthophora. See Rocha Filho & Packer (2017) for
phylogenetic analysis, subgeneric classification, and key to the subgenera. Revisions: Baker
(1975), most subgenera, USA and Canada; see also Mitchell (1913). (couplet 182)
162. MegachileLatreille: Small to large megachiliform [Figs. 463 and 464] or sometimes
heriadiform [Fig. 465], usually with pale tergal hair bands. Common, with over 200 described
species in our area. Canada through USA, Mesoamerica, Antilles and throughout South America;
present in all climatic zones (cosmopolitan). Megachile is an enorrnously diverse group in terms
of nesting biology and host-plant associations. The genus can be divided into "leaf-cutters" that
use leaf discs to line their brood cells in pre-existing cavities or the ground, and "daubers" that
build their brood cells with resin or mud mixed with salivary secretions in pre-existing cavities,
holes in the ground, or sometimes exposed on the surface of stones or wood (Trunz et al.2016).
Phylogenetic studies based on molecular (Trunz et al.2016) and morphological (Gonzalez et al.
2019) data indicated that leaf-cutters have arisen from a basal grade ofdaubers. Species of
Megachile range from generalists to specialists, with host-plant specialists often associated with
Asteraceae, Onagraceae, Fabaceae, and Cactaceae. Some recent studies have proposed dividing
the genus Megachile into over 20 genera, many of which are difficult to diagnose
morphologically. We retain the the broader definition of Megachile, following Michener (2007)
and Trunz et al. (2016). Revisions: Mitchell (1934-37), species north of Mexico; Mitchell (1956)
and Snelling (1990) for subgenus Chelostomoides; Gonzalez and Griswold (2007) for
Argyropile; Bzdyk (2012) for Litomegachile; for Mesoamerica, none except for Chelostomoides,
Argtropile, and Litomegachile, but see Mitchell (1930, 1943). Michener (2007) provides keys to the subgenera of Megachile in the Western Hemisphere. Sheffield et al. (2011) provide a key to
and thorough taxonomic treatment of the 38 species present in Canada and Alaska. (couplet 221)
Megachilinae: Osmiini
163. Ashmeadiella Cockerell: Small, robust heriadiform or megchiliform [Figs. 466 and467l,
black or with a red metasoma, tergal bands of pale hairs present; anterior surface of first
metasomal tergum concave, delimited by carina almost as in Heriades. Males readily recognized
by four teeth on T6 except subgenus Isosmia. Common in southwestem USA, especially Mojave
and adjoining deserts (Murray et al.202l), elsewhere uncommon or rare. Western North
America from southern Canada to Oaxaca and Quintana Roo. Nests in pre-formed burrows in
stems or probably in other small spaces, also in snail shells. Murray et al. (2021) provide a
molecular phylogeny, analysis of phenology and host-plant associations, and a revised
subgeneric classification for the genus. Revision: Michener (1939a); Hurd and Michener (1955)
for California but covers most species. (couplet 226)
164. Atoposmia Cockerell: Minute (5mm) to moderately sized (i0mm) megachiliform; often
black (subgenera Atoposmia and Eremosmia) but sometimes weakly metallic green (subgenus
Hexosmia). Distributed in western North America from British Columbia, eastward to Montana,
Colorado and Wyoming, southward through Arizona, Texas, Baja California to central Mexico
(Puebla and Morelos) (nearctic). Uncommon in the montane areas, rare elsewhere. Members of
the subgenus Atoposmia are specialists on Penstenton and Keckiella (Plantaginaceae). Nests are
built above or belorv ground from masticated plant material, soil or a mixture of the two
(Michener 2001). Revisions: Michener Q9a3); Hurd and Michener (i955) for westem
Atoposmia and Hexosmia, and California Eremosmia. In the first edition of this book, Atoposmia
was treated as a subgenw of Hoplftrs. Michener (2007) elevated Atoposmia to generic level; a
result that was confirmed by Sedivy et al. (2013) based on a molecular phylogeny of Hoplitis and
relatives.
165. Chelostoms Latreille: Minute to smallish, unusually slender heriadiform [Fig. 468], with or
without very weak tergal hair bands; apex of metasoma of male only slightly curled under, six
exposed stema; sculpturing fine, no series of pits across base of propodeum. Not uncommon in
Pacific coast states, rare in central and eastern states. Southern Canada to Baja California, east to
Atlantic coast; two additional introduced species (Chelostoma campanularum and C. rapunculi)
in the eastern US (holarctic). Nests in preformed burrows in wood.
All western species belong in subgenus Neochelostoma.The single native eastern and
central North American species, C. philadelpfri (Robertson), has long been put in a separate
genus, Prochelostorea Robertson (see Michener 1938c), but is nested within monophyletic
Chelostoma (Praz et al 2008). Chelostoma philadelphi is oligolectic on Philadelphus
(Saxifragaceae). Because of difficulty of decision at couplet 183, Chelostoma comes out at two
places in the Key to the Genera. Revisions: Michener (1938a,c); Hurd and Michener (1955).
(couplets 186 and227)v
v v
v
v
v
v
\,
\,
v
v166. Heriades Spinola: Small, heriadiform [Figs. 469 and 470], black with narrow apical white
hair bands on terga; anterior surface of T1 concave and delimited by distinct carina; apex of
metasoma of male tightly curled under, T7 not visible and only one to three sterna are exposed;
sculpturing conspicuously coarse. Common in USA, less common elsewhere. Canada through
USA, Antilles, and Mesoamerica; rare in the tropics as far south as northern Colombia (eastern
hemisphere, except Australia, including western Pacific islands). Resin nests in preformed
burrows in wood. Our species all belong in the subgenus Neotrypetes. Revisions: Michener
(1938b, l95ab); and Hurd and Michener (1955) for California and adjacent states. (coupletZZ2)
167 . Hoplilis Klug: Minute to rather large heriadiform lFig. a7l] or megachiliform, often black
but sometimes brilliant green or blue-green (some species in the subgenus Alcidamea, sensu
Sedivy et al.2012); metasoma sometimes red, frequently with tergal pale hair bands. Common in
spring in much of western USA; uncommon elsewhere. Boreal (northem Canada and Alaska)
throughout USA south to Puebla in Mexico (holarctic and African). Females nest in pre-existing
cavities in wood or stone cracks, or excavated burrows in the ground or pithy stems. Some
species build exposed nests constructed of pebbles and mud. Sedivy et al. (2012) provides a
robust molecular phylogeny for the genus Hoplitis, a revised classification of the subgenera, and
a thorough review of diversity in nesting biology. Based on their classification, the valid New
World subgenera are Alcidamea, Formicapis (both also present in palearctic region),
Robertsonella, and Proteriades. Revisions: Michener (1947) for Alcidamea sensu Sedivy et al.
(2020); Neff (2009) for Roberrsonella; Timberlake and Michener (1950) for Proteriades sensu
Sedivy et al. (2020). See also Hurd and Michener ( I 95 5) for Califomia. (corplet 227)
Key to the subgenera of Hoptitis (lllgl2022; key provided by Terry):
Males
a. 56 with longitudinal median hairy ridge, sometimes extending as median process beyond rest
of stemum or consisting primarily of a midapical hairy process; T7 bilobed, sometimes only
weakly so [except tridentate with lateral spines longer than median spine in H. xerophila];
metasoma commonly partly or wholly red, never metallic..... ....Proteriades
-. 56 without longitudinal median hairy ridge or midapical process (but with a tuft of hairs in
some species); T7 ending in a truncation, convexity, or point; metasoma black or brownish
black, sometimes metallic..... .................b
b(a). Metanotum approximately on same level as scutellum, a line tangential to scutum and
scutellum in profile thus nearly touching metanotum; stigma distinctly broader than prestigma, as
measured to wing margin .c
-. Metanotum depressed below level of scutellum, which curves down posteriorly to meet
metanotum, a line tangential to scutum and scutellum in profile thus well above metanotum;
stigma smaller, about as broad as prestigma, as measured to wing margin.................... Alcidamea
c(b). First recurrent vein nearly meeting first submarginal crossvein; T7 four-lobed (northern
holarctic) ..... H. (Formicapis)
-. First recurrent vein considerably distal to first submarginal crossvein; T7 rounded (eastern
nearctic).... H. (Robertsonella) Females
a. Proboscis short, in repose scarcely extending out of proboscidial fossa; galeal blade and first
two segments of labial palpus frequently with numerous strong hairs, these hooked or wavy
apically; (T6 not strongly concave in profile; posterior coxa with longitudinal carina on inner
ventral angle; metasoma usually partly or wholly red) .......... ............Proteriades (part)
-.Proboscis longer, in repose extending well beyond limit of proboscidial fossa; galeal blade
and labial palpus without hooked or wavy hairs.......... ..............b
b(a). Metanotum approximately on same level as scutellum, a line tangential to scutum and
scutellum in profile thus nearly touching metanotum; stigma distinctly broader than prestigma, as
measured to u,ing margin c
-. Metanotum depressed below level of scutellum, which curves down posteriorly to meet
metanotum, a line tangential to scutum and scutellum in profile thus well above metanotum;
stigma smaller, about as broad as prestigma, as measured to wing margin .d
c(b). Mandibular apical width nearly half of mandibular length; mandible tridentate; lower
margin of clypeus entire; first recurrent vein considerably distal to first submarginal crossvein
(eastern nearctic) Robertsonella
-. Mandibular apical margin more than half of mandibular length; mandible with two lower
apical teeth followed by long undulate margin; lower margin of clypeus with median snoutlike
projection; first recurrent vein nearly meeting first submarginal crossvein (northern holarctic)
Formicapis
v
v
vd(b). T6 nearly straight in profile; metasoma partly red (western nearctic).
-. T6 distinctly concave in profile; metasoma without red............... Proteriades (part)
Alcidamea
168. OsmiaPanzer: Small to moderate-sized, rarely large, megachiliform [Fig. 472],usually
metallic (sometimes brilliantly so like chrysidids or Augochlora), rarely black in boreal and
montane environments, usually without appreciable tergal hair bands. Common in western North
America (rare in deserts), moderately common in east, uncommon in Mexico. This is the largest
osmiine genus in our area with over 148 species. Alaska, Canadian northern territories, south
through most of Canada, entire USA and mountains of Mexico to Costa Rica; some desert
species in northwestern Mexico and southwestern USA; absent in tropics (holarctic). Females
exhibit diverse nesting habitats. Nests can be constructed in pre-existing cavities, old nests
created by other bees and wasps, abandoned snail shells, and crevices in stone. Some species dig
nests de novo in sand, soil or even dung pats; others construct exposed nests. Females construct
brood cells using a pulp of finely masticated leaf tissue, mud. or a combination of leaf masticate
and soil. Several species are managed as pollinators of fruit crops. Reviews of nesting biology in
Bosch et al. (2001) and Cane et al. (2007). Rightmyer et al. (2013) provide a key to the currently
recognized subgenera of Osmia in the Westem Hemisphere. Revisions: Rust (1974), subgenera
Osmia s.str., Helicosmia (as Chalcosmia) and Cephalosmia; Sandhouse (1939), excluding
Diceratosmia and Mexican species; Sinha and Michener (1958), "Centrosmia" (largely
nigrifrons group of Rightmyer et aI,2010); White (1952),"Acanthosmioides " (odontogaster v
vgroup of Rightmyer et al. 2013); Rightmyer et al (2010) non-metallic species; Griswold and
Ri ghtmyer (20 I 7 ), sub genus D i c er a t o s m i a. (c ouplet 223) .
169. ProtosmiaDucke: Small, heriadiform, almost without pale tergal hair bands. Not
uncommon; one species, P. rubiflorrs (Cockerell). Pacific coast states of USA and mountains of
northwestem Arizona and southwestem Utah; probably occurs in northern Baja California
(holarctic). Resin nests in above ground cavities; recorded from closed pine cones and wood
nesting blocks (in Griswold 1986). Only the subgenus Chelostomopszs occurs in our area.
Taxonomy: Michener (1938c); Hurd and Michener (1955). (couplet 225)
The American species, formerly put in its own genus, Chelostomopszs Cockerell, is now
considered as a subgenus of the otherwise palearctic Protosmia. This relationship was suggested
by Popov (1961), and the classificatory change was made by Griswold (1986b).
710. Xeroheriades Griswold: Small, heriadiform, black with largely reddish metasoma and
apical bands of white hair on metasomal terga; anterior surface of T1 convex except for
Iongitudinal depression, not margined by carina; apical margins of terga concave. Rare; one
species, X. micheneri Griswold, which is a specialist on Phacelia (Boraginaceae). Nests
unknown. Desert mountains of southern California (Griswold 1986a). (couplet 225)
Family Melittidae
Glossa short, pointed, without flabellum. Labial palpus with segments similar, none of them
elongate and sheathlike. Mentum elongate, sclerotized, tapering basally; lorum Y-shaped, basal
arms slender as in long-tongued bees; mentum and lorum forming long lobe projecting behind
proboscis when proboscis is folded. One subantennal suture. Facial fovea absent.
NOTES ON THE BIOLOGY, PHYLOGENY, AND CLASSIFICATION. Melittid bees are all
ground-nesting, solitary, and with narrow host-plant preferences. They are most diverse in
Africa, where all three subfamilies occur. This family is absent frorn South America and
Australia. Phylogeny of Melittidae was most recently analyzed by Michez et a7. (2009) and we
follow the classification used therein.
Dasypodainae -- Hesperapini
17l. Hesperapis Cockerell: Small to moderate-sized, andreniform, usually with tergal hair
bands; metasoma, especially of female, dorso-ventrally flattened and integument soft, rarely red.
Differs from superficially similar and more common genera, such as Andrena, Halictus,
Lasioglossum, and Colletes by the presence of the tibial (rather than trochanteral/femoral) scopa.
Not uncommon. Western and central USA, north to North Dakota (but absent from northeastem
and northwestern states), east to Florida, south to Baja California, Morelos and Puebla. Nests
with unlined cells excavated in sandy soils. The majority of species are host-plant specialists on
Asteraceae, Malvaceae, Fabaceae, Onagraceae, Boraginaceae andZygophyllaceae (Stage 1966).
Revision: Stage (1966); Snelling and Stage ( 1995a) for subgenus Xeralictoides. (couplet i 94) Melittinae -- Macropidini
172. Macropis Panzer: Small to moderate-sized, robust andreniform lFig. 4491, with shiny black
metasoma and limited pale hair bands. Uncommon. Eastern and central USA and southem
Canada, west to British Colombia and Washington state (holarctic). Macropis are highly
specialized "oil bees" that collect floral oils from plants in the genus Lysimachia (Primulaceae).
Females have densely-packed, sponge-like brushes on the fore- and mid-tarsi for sponging up
floral oils. The oils are used to line the brood cell and are mixed into the pollen provisions as
food for developing larvae (Cane et al. 1983). Excavate shallow nests in moist soils. Oligolectic
on Lysimachia. Our species are in the subgenus Macropls s.str. Revision: Michez & Patiny
(2005) fworldwide]. (couplet 194)
Melittinae - Melittini
173. Melilta Kirby: Moderate-sized, andreniform [Fig. 450], with tergal hair bands. Appearance
like that of moderate-sized, nonmetallic Andrena; females differing by lack of trochanteral and
femoral scopa and absence of facial foveae. Rare. Quebec, Canada, eastem USA and deserts of
Arizona, California, and Baja Califomia (holarctic and African). Dellicourt et al. (2014) provide
a phylogeny of the genus and an analysis of historical biogeography and host-plant evolution.
Melitta eich,ttorti, M. melittoides, and M. americana are specialists on Ericaceae. The host plant
range of M. califurnica is broader, including Asteraceae and Malvaceae (Michez and Eardley
2007). Revision: Michez & Eardley (2007) [worldwide]. (couplet 41)
v
Y
v \,
v
v
v
vLiterature cited, lupdated 7 /8/20 2 2l
Aguiar AJ, Melo GAR. 2011. Revision and phylogeny of the bee genus ParatetrapediaMoure. with
description of a new genus from the Andean Cordillera (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Tapinotaspidini)
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society.162(2):351442
Albuquerque PMC de, Camargo JMF. 2007. Esp6cies novas de Trigonisca Moure (Hymenoptera,
Apidae, Apinae). Revista Brasileira de Entomologia. 5 1 : 160-75
Almeida EAB, Danforth BN. 2009. Phylogeny of colletid bees (Hymenoptera: Colletidae) inferred
from four nuclear genes. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution.50(2):290-309
Almeida EAB, Packer L, Danforth BN. 2008. Phylogeny of the Xeromelissinae (Hymenoptera:
Colleti dae) based upon morphology and molecules. Ap i do I o g i e. 39 (1) :7 5-8 5
Almeida EAB, Packer L, Melo GAR, Danforth BN, Cardinal SC, etal.2019. The diversification of
neopasiphaeine bees during the Cenozoic (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Zoologica Scripta.
48(2):22642
Almeida EAB, Pie MR, Brady SG, Danforth BN. 2012. Biogeography and diversification of colletid
bees (Hymenoptera: Colletidae): emerging patterns from the southern end of the world. Journal
of b io geo gr ap hy. 39 (3): 52644
Alves-dos-Santos I, Melo GAR, Rozen Jr JG. 2002. Biology and immature stages of the bee tribe
Tetrapediini (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Americ an Mus eum N ovitates . 337 7 : I 45
Ascher JS, Engel MS. 2012. Discovery of the bee genus Perdita in the West Indies (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae): a new species from Isla Cabritos in the Dominican Republic. Acta Entomologica
Mus ei Nationalis Pragae. 52(2):595402
Ascher JS, Kornbluth S, Goelet RG. 2014. Bees (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Anthophila) of Gardiners
Island, Suffolk County, New York. Northeas tern Natural is t. 2l (1):47 -7 L
Ascher JS, Pickering J. 2021. Discover Life bee species guide and world checklist (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea: Anthophila). version ##; updated on ##l##l##. wu,w.discoverlife.org
Ayala R. 1988. Abejas silvestres (Hyrnenoptera: Apoidea) de Chamela, Jalisco, M6xico. Folia
Entontol6gica Mexicana. 7 7 :39 5493
Ayala R. 1999a. Revisi6n de las abejas sin aguij6n de M6xico (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini).
Folia Entomologica Mexicana. 106:1-123
Ayala R. 1999b. Sistematica de los taxa supraespecificos de las abejas de la tribu Centridini.PltD
thesis. Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de M6xico
Ayala R. 2002. Two new subgenera of bees in the genus Centris (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Scientific
papers, Natural History Museum, the University of Kansas.25:l-8
Baker JR. 1975. Taxonomy of five Nearctic subgenera of Coelioxys (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
(Jniv ers ity of Kans as Sc ience Bullet in. 50(12):649-7 30 Balboa C, Hinojosa-Dtaz I, Ayala R. 2017. New dark species of the bee genus Colletes
(Hymenoptera, Colletidae) from Mexico and Guatemala. Zootaxa.4320(3):401-25
Batra SWT. 1980. Ecology, behavior, pheromones, parasites and management of the sympatric vernal
bees Colletes inaequalis, C. thoracicus and C. validus. Journal of the Kansas Entomological
Society. 53(3):509-3 8
Beutel RG, Friedrich F, Yang X-K, Ge S-Q. 2014. Insect Morphology and Phylogeny: A Textbookfor
Students of Entomologl,. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter
Biani NB, Wcislo WT. 2007. Notes on the reproductive morphology of the parasitic bee Megalopta
byroni (Hymenoptera: Halictidae), and a tentative new host record. Journal of the Kansas
Enromo lo gic al S oc iety. 80(4):392-9 4
Blair BH, Cockerell TDA. 1935. The bees of the group Dieunomia. Journal of the New York
Ento m o logical Soc tety. a3 Q):201 -l 5
Bogusch P. 2005. Biology of the cleptoparasitic bee Epeoloides coecutiens (Hymenoptera: Apidae:
Osirini). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. 78(1):1-12
Bohart GE. 1942. A synopsis of the genus Micralictoides (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Pan-Pacific
Entomologrsr. I 8(3): 11913
Bohart GE. 1965. A new genus of dufoureine bee from Texas (Hymenoptera: Halictidae). Annals of
the Entomological Society of America. 58(3):319-21
Bohart GE, Griswold TL. 1987. A revision of the dufoureine genus Micralictoides Timberlake
(Hymenoptera: Hali cti dae). P an - P ac ifi c Ent o m o I o gi s r. 63 (2) : | 7 8-93
Bohart GE, Griswold T. 1996. A revision of the rophitine genus Protodufourea (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae) . Journal of the Kans as Entomolo gical Soc i ety. 69 $):17 7 -84
Bosch J, Maeta Y, Rust R. 2001. A phylogenetic analysis of nesting behavior in the genus Osmia
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Annals of the Entomologicol Society of America. g4(4):617-27
Bossert S, Copeland RS, Sless TJL, Branstetter MG, Gillung JP, et aL.2020. Phylogenomic and
morphological reevaluation of the bee tribes Biastini, Neolarrini, and Townsendiellini
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) with description of three new species of Schwarzia. Insect Systematics
and Diversiry. a$):l-29
Bossert S, Murray EA, Almeida EAB, Brady SG, Blaimer BB, Danforth BN. 2019. Combining
transcriptomes and ultraconserved elements to illuminate the phylogeny of Apidae. Molecular
phylogenetics and evolution. 1 30: 12 1-3 1
Bossert S, Murray EA, Pauly A, Chernyshov K, Brady SG, Danforth BN. 2021a. Gene tree estimation
error with ultraconserved elements: An empirical study on Pseudapzi bees. Systemotic Biology.
70(4):803-21
Bossert S, Wood TJ, Patiny S, Michez D, Almeida EAB, et al.202lb. Phylogeny, biogeography and
diversification of the mining bee family Andrenidae. Systematic Entomology.202l:l-20 v
v
v
\,
v
\,
vBouseman JK, LaBerge WE. 1978. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western
Hemisphere. Part IX. Subgenus Melandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological
Sociery ( I 89 0-). 104(3 I 4):275-3 89
Brasero N, Martinet B, Lecocq T, Lhomme P, Biella P, et al. 2018. The cephalic labial gland
secretions of two socially parasitic bumblebees Bombus hyperboreus (,4lpinobombus) and
Bombus inexspectatus (Thoracobombus) question their inquiline strategy . Insect Science.
25( I ):75-86
Broemeling DK. 1988. A revision of the Nomada subgenus Nomadita of North America
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). P an-P acific Entomologis t. 64(4):32144
Broemeling DK, Moalif AS. 1988. A revision of the Nomada subgenus Pachynomada (Hymenoptera:
Anthophori dae). P an - P a c ifi c E nt o m o I o gi s t. 6 4 (3) :20 1 -27
Brooks RW. 1983. Systematics and bionomics of Anthophora--the Bomboides Group and species
groups of the New World (Hymenoptera, Apoidea, Anthophoridae). University of California
Publications in Entomology. 98: 1-86
Brooks RW. 1987. Classification of the anthophorine bees (Hymenoptera: Anthophorini). University
of Kansas Science Bulletin. 53:436-57 5
Brooks RW, Griswold TL. 1988. A key to the species of Trachusa subgenus Heteranthidium with
descriptions of new species from M6xico (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae; Anthidiini). Journal of
the Kans as Entomo lo gical So ciety. 61 (3):33246
Brothers DJ.1975. Phylogeny and classification of the aculeate Hymenoptera, with special reference
to Mutillidae. University of Kansas Science Bulletin.50:483-648
Brothers DJ.1976. Modifications of the metapostnotum and origin of the'propodeal triangle'in
Hymenoptera Aculeata . Sys tematic Entomolo gy. | (3):17 7 -82
Bzdyk EL.2012. A revision of the Megachile subgenus LitomegachileMrtchell with an illustrated
key and description of a new species (Hymenoptera, Megachilidae, Megachilini). ZooKeys.
(22r):31-61
Camargo JMF, Kerr WE, Lopes CR. 1967. Morfologia externa de Melipona (Melipona) marginata
Lepeletier (Hymenopt era). P apdis Avuls o s Zoologia S do P aulo. 20:229-58
Camargo JMF, Moure JS. 1994. Meliponinae neotropicais: os g6neros Paratrigona Schwarz, 1938 e
Aparatrigona Morre, 1 95 1 (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Arquivo s de Zo o lo gia. 32(2):33-109
Camargo JMF, Moure JS. 1996. Meliponini neotropicais: o gdnero Geotrigona Moure, 1943 (Apinae,
Apidae, Hymenoptera), com especial referOncia i filogenia e biogeografta. Arquivos de
Zo o I o gi a. 33 (2-3) :9 5 -l 6I
Camargo JMF, Pedro SR. 2003. Meliponini neotropicais: o gdnero Partamona Schwarz, 1939
(Hymenoptera, Apidae, Apinae) - bionomia e biogeografra. Revista Brasileira de Entomologia.
a7Q):3tt-72
Camargo JMF, Pedro SR. 2004. Meliponini neotropicais: o g6nero Ptilotrigona Moure (Hymenoptera,
Apidae, Apinae). Rev is ta B ras il eira de Entomologia. 48(3):3 53-7 7 Camargo JMF, Pedro SR. 2005. Neotropical Meliponini: the genus DolichotrigonaMoure
(Hymenoptera, Apidae, Apinae). Revista Brasileira de Entomologia. a9Q):69-92
Camargo JMF, Pedro SR. 2013. Meliponini Lepeletier, 1836. In Catalogue of Bees (Hymenoptera,
Apoidea) in the Neotropical Region 2nd Edition (Online Version), eds. JS Moure, D Urban, GAR
Melo
Camargo JMF, Roubik DW. 1991. Systematics and bionomics of the apoid obligate necrophages: the
Trigona hypogea group (Hymenoptera: Apidae; Meliponinae). Biological Journal of the Linnean
Sociery- aaQ):13-39
Camillo E. 2005. Nesting biology of four Tetrapedia species in trap-nests (Hymenoptera: Apidae:
Tetrapedi in i). Rev is t a d e B iol o gi a Tro pi c a l. 53 (l -2) : 1 7 5-86
Cane JH, Eickwort GC, Wesley FR, Spielholz J. 1983. Foraging, grooming and mate-seeking
behaviors of Macropis nuda (Hymenoptera, Melittidae) and use of Lysimachia ciliata
(Primulaceae) oils in larval provisions and cell linings. American Midland Naturalist.
110(2):257-64
Cane JH, Griswold T, Parker FD.2007. Substrates and materials used for nesting by North American
Osmia bees (Hymenoptera: Apiformes: Megachilidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of
America. 1 00(3) :3 50-5 8
Carril OM, Griswold T, Haefner J, Wilson JS. 2018. Wild bees of Grand Staircase-Escalante National
Monument : ri chness, abundance, and spati o-temporal beta-divers ity . P e erJ. 6 :e5 867
Carril OM, Wilson JS. 2021. Common Bees of Eastern North Arnerica. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press
Coelho BWT. 2002. The biology of the primitively eusocial Augochloropsis iris (Schrottky, 1902)
(Hymenoptera, Halicti dae). I ns ec t e s S o c iaux. a9 Q) :1 8 1 -90
Coelho BWT. 2004. A review of the bee genus Augochlorella (Hymenoptera: Halictidae:
Augochl ori ni). Sy s t e m at i c E nt o m o I o gy . 29 (3) :282-3 23
Crawford J. 1926. North American bees of the genus Panurginus. Proceedings of the Entomological
S o c i ety of Wa s hin gt on. 28(9) :207 -l 4
Cross E. 1958. A revision of the bees of the subgenus Epinomia in the New World (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae) . Univers iry of Kans as Science Bulletin. 3 8( I 6) : 126l-1301
da Rocha-Filho LC, Melo GAR.20lL Nesting biology and behavioural ecology of the solitary bee
Monoeca haemonhoidalis (Smith) and its cleptoparasite Protosiris gigas Melo (Hymenoptera:
Apidae: Tapinotaspidini; Osirini). Journol of Natural History.45(4546):281540
Daly HV. i973. Bees of the genus Ceratina in America north of Mexico (Hymenoptera: Apoidea).
(Jnivers ity of C alifornia Publ ic ations in Entomolo gy. 7 4:l-l | 4
Daly HV, Magnacca KN. 2003. Hawaiian Hylaeus (l.lesoprosopis) Bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea),
Vol. 17. University of Hawaii Press
Danforth BN. 1991. The morphology and behavior of dimorphic males in Perdita portalis
(Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). B ehavioral E colo gy and So ciob iolo gy. 29@):B 5a7v
v v
\,
v
v
v
vDanforth BN. 1994. Taxonomic review of Calliopsis subgenus Hypomacrotera (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae), with special emphasis on the distributions and host plant associations. Pan-Pacific
E nto m o I o g is t. 7 0 :283-300
Danforth BN. 1996. Phylogenetic analysis and taxonomic revision of the Perdita subgenera
Macrotera, Macroteropsis, Macroterella and Cockerelluia (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae).
Univers ity of Kans as Science Bul I etin. 5 5 (1 6):63 5-92
Danforth BN, Michener CD. 1988. Wing folding in the Hymenoptera. Annals of the Entomological
S o c i e ty of Am e r ic a. 8l (2) :3 4249
Danforth BN, Minckley RL, Neff JL. 2019. The Solitary Bees: Biolog,,, Evolution, Conservation.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press
Danforth BN, Wcislo WT. 1999. Two new and highly apomorphic species of the Lasioglossum
subgenus Er,ylaeus (Hymenoptera: Halictidae) from Central America. Annals of the
E nt om o I o gi cal S o c iety of Am er i c a. 92(5):62a4 0
Dellicour S, Lecocq T, Kuhlmann M, Mardulyn P, MichezD.2014. Molecular phylogeny,
biogeography, and host plant shifts in the bee genus Melitta (Hymenoptera: Anthophila).
Moleculor Phylo genetic s and Evolution. 7 0 :412-19
Dibble AC, Drummond FA, Stubbs C, Veit M, Ascher JS. 2017. Bees of Maine, with a state species
checklist. Northeas t ern N aturalrsl. 24(Monograph 1 5) : 1 -48
Donovan BJ.1977. A revision of North American bees of the subgenus Cnemiandrena
(Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). University of California Publications in Entomolog,t 8l:1-107
Dorchin A, Danforth BN, Griswold T.2018a. A new genus of eucerine bees endemic to southwestem
North America revealed in phylogenetic analyses of the Eucera complex (Hymenoptera: Apidae:
Eucerini). Arthropod Sys tematics and P hylo geny. 7 6(2):21 5-3 4
Dorchin A,L6pez-Uribe MM, PrazCJ, Griswold T, Danforth BN. 2018b. Phylogeny, new generic-
level classification, and historical biogeography of the Eucera complex (Hymenoptera: Apidae).
Mo lecular P hylo genetics and Evo lution. I 19 :81 -92
Dressler RL. 1978. An infrageneric classification of Euglossa, with notes on some features of special
taxonomic importance (Hymenoptera; Apidae). Revista de Biologia Tropical.26:187-98
Dressler RL. 1979. Eulaema bombiformis, E. meriana, and mtillerian mimicry in related species
(Hymenoptera: Api dea). B i o tr op ic a. I I (2) :l 44-5 |
Droege S, Rightmyer MG, Sheffield CS, Brady SG. 2010. New synonymies in the bee genus Nomada
from North America (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Zo otaxa. 2661 (l):1-32
Dubitzky A.2007 . Phylogeny of the world Anthophorini (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Apidae).
Systematic Entomology. 32(4): 5 85-600
Dubitzky A, Plant J, Schonitzer K. 2010. Phylogeny of the bee genus Andrena Fabricius based on
morphology. Mitteilungen der Milnchner Entomologischen Gesellschaft 100:137-202
Duchateau MJ, Van Leeuwen P. 1990. Early sex determination in larvae of Bombus terrestris.
I ns ectes So ciaux. 37 (3):232-3 5 Dumesh S. 2013. Revision of the rare Mesoamerican bee genus Mexalictus (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae) with the description of 21 new species. Zootaxa.3708(1):1-80
Dumesh S, Sheffield CS. 2012. Bees of the genus Dufourea Lepeletier (Hymenoptera: Halictidae:
Rophitinae) of Canada. Canadian Journal of Arthropod ldentification. 20:l-36
Eickwort GC. 1969. A comparative morphological study and generic revision of the augochlorine
bees (Hymenoptera: Halictidae) . University of Kansas Science Bulletin. 48(13):325-524
Eickwort GC. 1978. Mexalictus, a new genus of sweat bees from North America (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae, Halictinae) . Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. 5l :567-80
Eickwort GC, Linsley EG. 1978. The species of the parasitic bee genus Protepeolus (Hymenoptera:
Anthophoridae). Journal of the Kans as Ent omo lo gic al Socie t y^. 5 I :l 4-21
Engel MS. 2006. A new genus of cleptoparasitic bees from the West Indies (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae). Acta Zoologica Cracoviensia-Series B: Invertebrata.49(l-2):l-8
Engel MS. 2013. Revision of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Cleptommation (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae) . Journal of Melittology.22:l-26
Engel MS. 2015. A review of the genera and subgenera of Oxaeinae (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae).
Journal of Melittology. 52: 1-1 8
Engel M5.2022. Notes on the stingless bee genera Scaura and Geotrigona (Hymenoptera: Apidae).
Journal of Melittology. (108):1-a
Engel MS, Brooks RW. 1999. The augochlorine bee genus Megaloptilla (Hymenoptera: Halictidae).
ln Entomological Contributions in Memory of Byron A. Alexander, University of Kansas Natural
History Museum Special Publication No. 24, eds. GW Byers, R Hagen, RW Brooks, pp. 9-15.
Lawrence, KS: Kansas Natural History Museum
Engel MS, Michener CD, Rightmeyer MD. 2004a. A replacement name for the cleptoparasitic bee
genus Rhathymodes (Hymenoptera: Apidae\. Journal of Hymenoptera Research. 13316
Engel MS, Michener CD, Rightmeyer MD. 2004b. The cleptoparasitic bee tribe Rhathymini
(Hymenoptera: Apidae): description of a new genus and a tribal review. Journal of Hymenoptera
Research. l3(1):1-12
Engel MS, Smith-Pardo AH.2004. The bee genus Andinaugochlora in Central America
(Hymenoptera: Halictidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomologicol Society. TT(2):116-20
Engels W. 1990. Social Insects: An Evolutionat)) Approach to Castes and Reproduction. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag
Erenler HE, Orr MC, Gillman MP, Parkes BR, Rymer H, Maes J-M. 2016. Persistent nesting by
Anthophora Latreille, 1803 (Hymenoptera: Apidae) bees in ash adjacent to an active volcano.
P an- P ac ifi c E nt om o I o gis t . 92(2) :67 -7 8
Etl F, Franschitz A, Aguiar AJ, Schdnenberger J, D<jtterl S. 2017. A perfume-collecting male oil bee?
Evidences of a novel pollination system involving Anthurium acutifolium (Araceae) and
Paratetrapedia chocoensis (Apidae, Tapinotaspidini). Fl ora. 232:7 -l 5 v
v
v
v
v
v
vEvans DL.1972. A revision of the subgenus Holonomada of the genus Nomada. Wasmann Journal of
Biology.30:1-34
Evans HE. 1993. Observations on the nests of Paranthidium jugatorium perpictum
(Cockerell)(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae: Anthidiini) . Pan-Pacific Entomologist. 69:319-22
Ferrari RR, Onuferko TM, Monckton SK, Packer L.2020. The evolutionary history of the cellophane
bee genus Colletes Latreille (Hymenoptera: Colletidae): Molecular phylogeny, biogeography and
implications for a global infrageneric classification. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution.
146:106750
Fenari RR, Packer L.2021. Morphological phylogeny and review of the generic classification of
Colletinae (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society.193(1):199-
216
Frahnert KS, Seidelmann K. 2021.Individual Scent-Marks of Nest Entrances in the Solitary Bee,
Osmia cornuta (Hymenoptera: Apoide a). I ns ects. l2(\:8a3
Freitas FV, Branstetter MG, Casali DM, Aguiar AJ, Griswold T, Almeida EA.2022. Phylogenomic
dating and Bayesian biogeography illuminate an antitropical pattem for eucerine bees. Journal of
B io ge o gr ap hy. 49 (6):1 03 447
Freitas FV, Branstetter MG, Griswold T, Almeida EAB. 2020. Partitioned gene-tree analyses and
gene-based topology testing help resolve incongruence in a phylogenomic study of host-
specialist bees (Apidae: Eucerinae). Molecular Biology and Evolution.33(3):1090-1100
Gardner J, Gibbs J.2020. The 'red-tarled' Lasioglossum (Dialictus)(Hymenoptera: Halictidae) of the
western Nearctic. Europ ean Journal of Taxonomy. 7 25 :I-242
Gibbs l.2009a.Integrative taxonomy identifies new (and old) species in the
Lasioglossum (Dialictus) tegulare (Robertson) species group (Hymenoptera, Halictidae).
Zootaxa.2032(1):1-38
Gibbs J. 2009b. New species in the Lasioglossum petrellum species group identified through an
integrative taxonomic approach. C anadtan Entomologis t. 1 4l (4):37 l-96
Gibbs J. 2010. Revision of the metallic species of Lasioglossum (Dialictus) in Canada (Hymenoptera,
Halictidae, Halictini). Zootaxa. 259 I (1): 1-382
Gibbs L 2011. Revision of the metallic Lasioglossum (Dialicrus) of eastern North America
(Hymenoptera : Halictidae : Hali ct ini). Zo o t axa. 3 07 3 (1) : 1 -21 6
Gibbs L 2017. Notes on the nests of Augochloropsis metallica fulgida and Megachile mucida in
central Michigan (Hymenoptera: Halictidae, Megachilidae). The Great Lakes Entomologist.
s0(1):4
Gibbs J, Brady SG, Kanda K, Danforth BN. 2012. Phylogeny of halictine bees supports a shared
origin of eusociality for Halictus and Lasioglossum (Apoidea: Anthophila: Halictidae).
Mo I ecular P hylogenet ics and Evo lution. 65 (3):926-39
Gibbs J, Dumesh S. 2013. A new species, Lasioglossum (Eickwortia) hienae, from Mexico (Apoidea:
Halictidae) . Journal of Melittolo,g/. ( 13): 1-1 1 Gibbs J, Hanuschuk EJ, Shukla-Bergen S. 2021. Rediscovery of the rare bee Epeoloides pilosulus in
Manitoba (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of the Konsas Entomological Society. 93(2):176-82
Gibbs J, Packer L, Dumesh S, Danforth BN. 2013. Revision and reclassification of Lasioglossum
(Evylaeus), L. (Hemihalictus) and L. (Sphecodogastra) in eastern North America (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea: Halictidae) . Zo o t axa. 3 67 2(1) : 1 -l 17
Gibson WW. 1960. C6mo manejar y usar la colecci6n de insectos. Secretaria de Agriculture y
Ganaderia, Oficina de Estudios Especiales, M6xico
Goldstein PZ, Ascher JS. 2016. Taxonomic and behavioral composition of an island fauna: A survey
of bees (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Anthophila) on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts.
Pro c eed ings of the Entom ological Soc iety of Was hington. 7 1 8(1):37 -92
Gongalves RB. 2016. A molecular and morphological phylogeny of the extant Augochlorini
(Hymenoptera, Apoidea) with comments on implications for biogeography. Systematic
E nt o m o I o gt. a I Q) :a3 040
Gongalves RB. 2021. A revised genus-level classification for the Neotropical groups of the
cleptoparasitic bee tribe Sphecodini Schenck (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Halictinae). Revista
Bras ileira de Entomologia. 65( 1 ):
Gongalves RB, De Meira OM, Rosa 8.2022. Total-evidence dating and morphological partitioning: a
novel approach to understand the phylogeny and biogeography ofaugochlorine bees
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. ##:l-17
Gongalves RB, Melo GAR. 2010. Phylogeny of the bee subtribe Caenohalictina Michener
(Hymenoptera, Apidae sl, Halictinae sl). Zoologica Scripta. 39(2):187 -97
GonzalezVH, Engel MS. 201l. Andinopanurgus, a new Andean subgenus of Protandrena
(Hymenoptera, Andrenidae). Zo oKeys . 126 :57 -7 6
Gonzalez VH, Engel MS, Griswold TL. 2013. The lithurgine bees of Australia (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae), with a note on Megachile rotundipennis. Journal of Melittology. 1 1 :1-19
Gonzalez VH, Griswold TL. 2007. A review of the North and Central American Megachile subgenus
Argyropile Mitchell (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Zootaxa, (1 461):l-1 4
Gonzalez VH, Griswold TL. 2011. Two new species of Paratrigona and the male of Paratrigona
ornaticeps (Hymenoptera, Apida e). Zoo Keys . (120):9
Gonzalez VH, Griswold TL. 2013. Wool carder bees of the genus Anthidium in the Western
Hemisphere (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae): diversity, host plant associations, phylogeny, and
biogeography . Zoolo gical Journal of the Linnean So ciety. 1 68(2):221425
Gonzalez VH, Griswold T, Ayala R. 2010. Two new species of nocturnal bees of the genus
Megalopta (Hymenoptera: Halictidae) with keys to species. Revista de Biologia Tropical.
58(1):255-63
Gonzalez \{H, Griswold T, PrazCJ, Danforlh BN. 2012. Phylogeny of the bee family Megachilidae
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea) based on adult morphology. Systematic Entomolog.3T(2):261-86 v
\,
\,
v
v
v
v
\,
\,
\,GonzalezVH, Gustafson GT, Engel MS. 2019. Morphological phylogeny of Megachilini and the
evolution of leaf-cutter behavior in bees (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae): Evolution of leaf-cutter
behavior in bees. Journal of Melittology. 85:1-123
GonziiezVH, Roubik DW. 2008. Especies nuevas y filogenia de las abejas de fuego, Oxytrigona
(Hymenoptera: Apidae, Melipon ini). Acta Zool6 gica Mexic ana. 24(1):a3-7 I
Grigarick AA, Stange LA. 1968. The pollen-collecting bees of the Anthidiini of Califomia
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Bulletin of the Califurnia Insect Survey.9:1-113
Griswold T, Herndon JD, GonzalezYH.2015. First record of the orchid bee genus Eufriesea
Cockerell (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Euglossini) in the United States. Zootaxa.3957(3):34246
Griswold T, Miller W. 2010. A Revision of Perdita (Xerophasma) Timberlake (Hymenoptera:
Andrenida e). Zootaxa. 25 17 (l):1 -l 4
Griswold T, Rightmyer MG. 2017. A revision of the subgenus Osmia Q)iceratosmia),with
descriptions of four new species (Hymenoptera, Megachilidae). Zootaxa.4337(1):l-37
Griswold TL. 1986a. A new heriadine bee from the Mojave Desert. Southwestern Entomologist.
1 1: I 65-69
Griswold TL. 1986b. Notes on the nesting biology of Protosmia (Chelostomopsis) rubifloris
(Cockerell) (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Pan-Pacific Entomologist.62(1)i84-87
Griswold TL, Michener CD. 1988. Taxonomic observations on Anthidiini of the Western Hemisphere
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.6l:2245
Griswold TL, Michener CD. 1997.The classification of the Osmiini of the Eastern Hemisphere
(Hymenoptera, Megachilidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. T0:207-53
Griswold TL, Parker FD. 1988. New Perdita (Perdita) oligoleges of Mentzelia,with notes on related
species of the ventralis group (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). Pan-Pacific Entomologist.64:43-52
Grtiter C.2020. Stingless Bees: Their BehavioLtr, Ecology and Evolution. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer Nature
Habermannov6 J, Bogusch P, Straka J.2013. Flexible host choice and common host switches in the
evolution of generalist and specialist cuckoo bees (Anthophila: Sphecodes). PLoS One.
8(5):e64537
Hanson PE, Ot6rola MF, Segura JL, Frankie G, Coville R, et al.2021. Abejas de Costa Rica. San
Jose, Costa Rica: Editorial UCR
Hinojosa-DiazIA, Feria-Arroyo TP, Engel MS. 2009. Potential distribution of orchid bees outside
their native range: The cases of Eulaema polychronta (Mocs6ry) and Euglossa viridissimaFriese
in the USA (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Diversity and Distributions.15(3):421-28
Hurd Jr PD. 1955. The carpenter bees of California (Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Bulletin of the
California Ins ect Survey. 4:3 5-7 2
Hurd Jr PD. 1956. Notes on the subgenera of the New World carpenter bees of the genus Xylocopa
(Hymenoptera, Apoid ea). American Mus eum Novitat es. 17 7 6:l-7 Hurd Jr PD. 1958. American bees of the genus Dioxys Lepeletier and Serville-Hymenoptera,
Megachilidae. University of California Publications in Entomology.14,275-302
Hurd Jr PD. 1961. A synopsis of the carpenter bees belonging to the subgenus Xylocopoides Michener
(Hymenoptera; Apoidea). Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).
87(4):247-57
Hurd Jr PD. 1978a. An Annotated Catalog of the Carpenter Bees (Genu,s Xylocopa Latreille) of the
Western Hemisphere (Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Hurd Jr PD. 1978b. Bamboo-nesting carpenter bees (genus Xylocopa Latreille) of the subgenus
StenorytlocopaHurd and Moure (Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Journal of the Kansas
Entomological Society. 5 I :7 46-64
Hurd Jr PD. 1979. Superfamily Apoidea. In Catalog of Hymenoptera in America North of Mexico,
Yol.2, eds. KV Krombein, PD Hurd Jr, DR Smith, BD Burks. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 195 1 . The melectine bees of California. Bulletin of the Califurnia Insect
Survey. 1(5):1 1940
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 1964. The squash and gourd bees-gen era Peponapis Robertson and
Xenoglossa Smith-inhabiting America north of Mexico. Hilgardia.35(15)375a77
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 1966. The Mexican squash and gourd bees of the genus Peponapis
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Annals of the Entomological Society of America. 59(a):835-51
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 1967. Squash and gourd bees of the genus Xenoglossa. Annals of the
Entomological Society of America. 60(5):988-1 007
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 1970. A classification of the squash and gourd bees Peponapis and
Xeno glo s s a. Univ ers ity of C alfornia Publications in E ntomo I ogl,t. 62:l -39
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. l9T2.Parasitic bees of the genus Holcopasites Ashmead. Smithsonian
Contributions to Zoolog,t. ll4:141
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley GE. 1975. The principal Larrea bees of the southwestern United States
(Hymenoptera: Apoide a). Smiths onian C o ntributions to Zoolo g,t. I 93 :1 -7 4
Hurd Jr PD, Linsley EG. 1976.The bee family Oxaeidae with a revision of the North American
species (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology.220:l-75
Hurd Jr PD, Michener CD. 1955. The megachiline bees of Califomia (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Bulletin of the Califurnia Insect Sut vey. 3:1248
Hurd Jr PD, Moure JS. 1963. A classification of the large carpenter bees (Xylocopini) (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea). Univ ers ity of C alifurnia Publi cat ions in Entomolo g,t. 29 :1-365
Ito M. 1986. Supraspecific classification of bumblebees based on the characters of male genitalia.
Contributions from the Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, Series B.
20:l-143v
v
v
v
v
V v
\lJanjic J, Packer L.2001. New descriptions of Halictus (Seladonia) from the New World
(Hymenoptera: Halicti dae). Journal of Hymenoptera Res eorch. I 0( 1 ) : 5 5-7 5
Janjic J, Packer L.2003. Phylogeny of the bee genus Agapostemon (Hymenoptera: Halictidae).
Systematic Entomology. 28(1 ): 101)4
Johnson NF, Triplehorn CA. 2005. Borror and DeLong's Introduction to the Study of Insects.
Belmont, CA: Thompson Brooks/Cole. 7th ed.
Kayaalp P, Schwarz MP, Stevens MI. 2013. Rapid diversification in Australia and two dispersals out
of Australia in the globally distributed bee genus, Hylaeus (Colletidae: Hylaeinae). Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution. 66(3):668-78
Kennedy CM, Lonsdorf E, Neel MC, Williams NM, Ricketts TH, etal.2013. A global quantitative
synthesis of local and landscape effects on wild bee pollinators in agroecosystems. Ecology
letters. 16(5):584-99
Kilpatrick SK, Gibbs J, Mikulas MM, Spichiger S-E, Ostiguy N, et al. 2020. An updated checklist of
the bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea, Anthophila) of Pennsylvania, United States of America.
Journal of Hymenoptera Research. 77 :l-86
Kim KC. 1993. An Annotated Bibliography of Antarctic Invertebrates (Terrestrial and Freshwater)
Kimsey LS. 1979. An illustrated key to the genus Exaerete u,ith descriptions of male genitalia and
biology (Hymenoptera: Euglossini, Apidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.
52:73546
Kimsey LS. 1982. Systematics of bees of the genus Eufriesea (Hymenoptera, Apidae). UniversiQ of
C al ifo rnia P u b I ic at ion s in E nt o m o lo gy. 9 5 : 1 -125
Kleijn D, Winfree R, Bartomeus I, Carvalheiro LG, Henry M, et al. 2015. Delivery of crop pollination
services is an insufficient argument for wild pollinator conservation. Nature communications.
6(l ):1-9
Klerjn D, Winfree R, Bartomeus I, Carvalheiro LG, Henry M, et al. 2016a. Corrigendum: Delivery of
crop pollination services is an insufficient argument for wild pollinator conservation
Kleijn D, Winfree R, Bartomeus I, Carvalheiro LG, Henry M, et al. 2016b. Delivery of crop
pollination services is an insufficient argument for wild pollinator conservation (vol 6, 7414,
20 I 5). Nature Communications. 7 ;
Konzmann S, Kluth M, Karadana D, Lunau K. 2019. Pollinator effectiveness of a specialist bee
exploiting a generalist plant-tracking pollen transfer by Heriades truncorum with quantum
dots. Apidologie. 5 1 :201-l 1
LaBerge WE. 1955. Bees of the genus Anthedonia Michener in North America (Hymenoptera,
Apidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.2S($:132-35
LaBerge WE. 1956a. A revision of the bees of the genus Melissodes in North and Central America.
Part I (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Universiyt of Kansas Science Bulletin.3T(18):91 l-1I94
LaBerge WE. 1956b. A revision of the bees of the genus Melissodes in North and Central America.
Part II (Hymenoptera, Apidae). University of Kansas Science Bulletin.38(8):533-78 LaBerge WE. 1957. The genera of bees of the tribe Eucerini in North and Central America
(Hymenoptera, Apoide a). Am er ican Mus eum Novitates . 1837 :144
LaBerge WE. 1958a. Notes on the genus Gaesischia Michener, LaBerge and Moure, with
descriptions of a new species and subgenus from Mdxico (Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Pan-Pacific
E nt o mo I o g is t. 3 4(4) : 19 5 -20 |
LaBerge WE. 1958b. Notes on the North and Central American bees of the genus SvastraHolmberg
(Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.3l(4):266-73
LaBerge WE. 1961. A revision of the bees of the genus Melissodes in North and Central America.
Part III (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Univ ers i0, of Kans as Sc ience B u ll etin. 42(5):283463
LaBerge WE. 1964. Prodromus of American Bees of the Genus Andrena (Hymenoptera, Apoidea).
Bulletin of the UniversiQ of Nebraskn State Museum.4:279-316
LaBerge WE. 1967. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part I.
Callandrena. (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum.
7:l-31
LaBerge WE. 1969. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part IL
Plastandrena, Aporandrena, Choritandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological
Society ( I 890-). 95(l):147
LaBerge WE. 1970. A new genus with three nerv species of eucerine bees from Mexico
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. a3Q):321-28
LaBerge WE. l97la. A new subgenus of Andrena found in California and Oregon. Pan-Pacific
Ento mo lo gis t. 47 :47 -57
LaBerge WE. 1971b. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part
lY. Scrapteropsis, Xiphandrena andRhaphandrena. Transactions of the American
Entomological Society ( I 890-) . 97 Q):a4F520
LaBerge WE. 1973. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part VL
Subgenus Trachandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1590-).
99(3):235-371
LaBerge WE. 1977. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part
VIII. Subgenera Thysandrena, Dasyandrena, Psammandrena, Rhacandreno, Euandrena,
Oxyandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1590-).103(l):1-143
LaBerge WE. 1980. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part X.
Subgenus Andrena. Transactions of the Anterican Entomological Society (1590-).106(4):395-
525
LaBerge WE. 1985. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part XI
Minor Subgenera and Subgeneric Key. Transactions of the American Entomological Society
(18e0-). tn@):44t-567v
V
v
v
v v
v
\,
\,
vLaBerge WE. 1986. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Westem Hemisphere. Part
XII. Subgenera Leucandrena, Ptilandrena, Scoliandrena, and Melandrena. Transactions of the
Am er ic an E nt o m o I o gic al S o c iety ( I I 9 0 -) . I l2(3) : I 9 I -248
LaBerge WE. 1989a. A review of the bees of the genus Pectinapis (Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae).
Journal of the Kans as Entomo logic al So ciety. 62(4):524-27
LaBerge WE. 1989b. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere. Part
XIII. Subgenera Simandrena and Taeniandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological
Socie| 0 890-). 1 15(1):1-56
LaBerge WE. 2001. Revision of the bees of the genus Tetraloniella in the New World (Hymenoptera:
Apidae). Illinois N atural History Survey Bulletin. 3 6(3):67 -l 62
LaBerge WE, Bouseman JK. 1970. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Westem
Hemisphere. Part IlI. Tylandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).
96($:sa3405
LaBerge WE, Michener C. 1963. Deltoptila, a middle American genus of anthophorine bees
(Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum.4:211-26
LaBerge WE, Ribble DW. 1972. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western
Hemisphere. Part Y. Gonandrena, Geissandrena, Parandrena, Pelicandrena. Transactions of the
American Entomological Society ( I 890-). 98(3):27 1-358
LaBerge WE, Ribble DW. 1975. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Westem
Hemisphere. Part VII. Subgenus Euandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological
Socieg ( 1 890-). t0r(3\:37 1446
LaBerge WE, Thorp RW. 2005. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western
Hemisphere. Part XlV-Subgenus Onagrandrena. Illinois Natural History Survey Bulletin.
37(1):1-6a
LaBerge WE, Webb MC. 1962.The bumblebees of Nebraska. University of Nebraska College of
Agriculture Research Bulletin. 205 : 1-38
Labougle JM. 1990. Bombus of Mexico and Central America. University of Kansas Science Bulletin.
54:35-73
Labougle JM, Ito M, Okazawa T. i985. The species of the genus Bombus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) of
Chiapas, M6xico and Guatemala; with a morphometric and altitudinal analysis. Folia
Ent o mo I 6 gic a Mexic ana. (64) :5 5 -7 2
Larkin LL. 2004. Four new fall species of Andrena from the southwestem United States
(Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomologicol Society. TT(3):254-68
Larkin LL, Neff JL, Simpson BB. 2006. Phylogeny of the Callandrena subgenus of Andrena
(Hymenoptera: Andrenidae) based on mitochondrial and nuclear DNA data: polyphyly and
convergent evolution. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 3 8(2) : 3 3 0-43
Larkin LL, Neff JL, Simpson BB. 2008. The evolution of a pollen diet: host choice and diet breadth of
Andr ena bees (Hymenoptera: Andrenida e). Apidol o g ie. 39 (l) :133 45 Laroca S, Lauer S. 1973. Adaptagdo comportamental de Scaura latitarsis para coleta de p6len. Acta
B ioligica Paranaens e. 2:747 -52
Laverty TM, Harder LD. 1988. The bumble bees of eastern Canada. Canadian Entomologist.
t20(11):965-87
LeCroy KA, Savoy-Burke G, Carr DE, Delaney DA, Roulston TH.2020. Decline of six native mason
bee species following the arrival of an exotic congener. Scientific reports. 10(1):1-9
Lepeco A, Gongalves RB. 2022. Bayesian and parsimony phylogeny of Augochlorabees
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea) based on morphology: insights for their biogeography and natural
history. Arthropod Systematics & Phylogeny. 80:99-ll5
Lichtenberg EM, Kennedy CM, Kremen C,Batary P, Berendse F, et at.20I7a. A global synthesis of
the effects of diversified farming systems on arthropod diversity within fields and across
agricultural landscape s. Global change b iolo gy. 23 (1 l):49 46-57
Lichtenberg EM, Kennedy CM, Kremen C, Bat6ry P, Berendse F, et aL.2017b. Dataset supplementing
Lichtenbergetal.(2017) A global synthesis of the effects of diversified farming systems on
arthropod diversity within fields and across agricultural landscapes. Global Change Biology
Linsley EG. 1939. A revision of the nearctic Melectinae (Hymenoptera, Anthophoridae). Annals of
the Entomo I o gical Soc iety of America. 32(\:a2948
Linsley EG. 1940. A revision of the genus Oreopasites (Hymenoptera: Nomadidae). Transactions of
the American Entomological Society (1 890-). 66(4):307-1 8
Linsley EG. 1943a. A revision of the genus Neopasites (Hymenoptera: Nomadidae). Transactions of
the American Entomological Society (1 890-). 69(213):1 19-40
Linsley EG. 1943b. A revision of the genus Gnathopasiles (Hymenoptera: Nomadidae). Transactions
of the American Entomological SocieQ (1890-).69:14149
Linsley EG. 1943c. Revisions of the genera Townsendiella, Triopasites and Paranomada
(Hymenoptera: Nomadidae). Transactions of the Anterican Entomological Society (1590-).
69(2t3):93-106
Linsley EG. 1945. A new species of Paranomado wrth notes on Melecta thoracica Cresson.
Entomo lo gic al N ew s . 5 6 : I 49-53
Linsley EG, MacSwain JW, Raven PH, Thorp RW. 1973. Comparative behavior of bees and
Onagraceae,Y: Camissonia and Oenotherabees of cismontane California and Baja California.
University of California Publications in Entomology. 71:1-68
Linsley EG, Michener CD. 1937. Some new genera and species of North American parasitic bees
(Hymenoptera). P an-P acifi c Entomologis t. | 3 :7 5-84
Linsley EG, Michener CD. 1939. A generic revision of the North American Nomadidae
(Hymenoptera). Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).65(3):265-305
Litman JR, Danforth BN, Eardley CD, Praz CJ. 2011. Why do leafcutter bees cut leaves? New
insights into the early evolution of bees. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences . 27 8(1724):3593-3600v
v
v v
\,
\,
v
\,Litman JR, Griswold T, Danforth BN. 2016a. Phylogenetic systematics and a revised generic
classification of anthidiine bees (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution. 100:183-98
Litman JR, Griswold T, Danforth BN. 2016b. Phylogenetic systematics and a revised generic
classification of anthidiine bees (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Moleculor Phylogenetics and
Evolution. 100:183-98
Litman JR, Praz CJ, Danforth BN, Griswold TL, Cardinal S. 2013. Origins, evolution, and
diversification of cleptoparasitic lineages in long-tongued bees. Evolution.6T(10):2982-98
L6pez-Uribe MM, Jha S, Soro A. 2019. A trait-based approach to predict population genetic structure
in bees. Molecular Ecology. 28(8): 1919-29
L6pez-Uribe MM, Soro A, Jha S. 2017. Conservation genetics of bees: advances in the application of
molecular tools to guide bee pollinator conservation. Conservation Genetics.l8:501-6
Mahlmann T.2020. A new species of the previously monotypic Neotropical cleptoparasitic bee genus
Rhynostelts, with notes on Rhynostelis multiplicata (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Journal of
Melittology. (96):1-8
Marchi P, Melo GAR. 2006. Revislo taxon6mica das esp6cies brasileiras de abelhas do gCnero
Lestrimelitta Friese (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Meliponina). Revista Brasileira de Entomologia.
50:6-30
Martins AC, Melo GAR. 2016. The New World oil-collecting bees Centris and Epicharis
(Hymenoptera, Apidae): molecular phylogeny and biogeographic history. Zoologica Scripta.
45(t):22-33
Martins CF, Neto VI dos S, Cruz RDM. 2019. Nesting biology and mating behavior of the solitary
bee Epicharis nigrita (Apoidea: Centridini). Journal of Apicultural Research.5S(4):512)l
McGinley RJ. 1986a. Studies of Halictinae (Apoidea: Halictidae) II: Revision of Sphecodogastra,
floral specialists of Onagraceae. Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology.168(2):221425
McGinley zu. 1986b. Studies of Halictinae, I: Revision of New World Lasioglossum. Smithsonian
Contributions to Zoology. 429 :1-29 4
McGinley RJ. 1989. A catalog and review of immature Apoidea. Smithsonian Contributions to
Zoologt. 494:l-24
McGinley zu. 1999. Eich,ttortia (Apoidea, Halictidae), a new genus of bees from Mesoamerica.
Llniversity of Kansas Natural Htstory Museum Special Publication.24:Ill-20
Medler JT, Carney DW. 1963. Bumblebees of Wisconsin (Hymenoptera: Apidae). University of
Wiscons in Res earch Bulletin. 240:l-147
Meiners JM, Griswold TL, Canil OM. 2019. Decades of native bee biodiversity surveys at Pinnacles
National Park highlight the importance of monitoring natural areas over time. PloS one.
t4(l):e0207566
Michener CD. 1935. Some Pacific Coast Panurgtnus. Canadian Entomologist.67(12):275-78 Michener CD. 1938a. A review of the American bees of the genus Macropis. Psyche.45:133-35
Michener CD. 1938b. American bees of the genus Chelostoma. Pan-Pacific Entomologist.14:3645
Michener CD. 1938c. American bees of the genus Heriades. Annals of the Entomological Society of
America.3l:514-31
Michener CD. 1938d. The bees of the genera Chelostomopsis, Formicapis, Robertsonella, and
P ro chel o s t om a. (Hymen. : Megachili dae). E nt om o I o gi c al N ew s . 49 :l 27 -32
Michener CD. 1939a. A revision of the genus Ashmeadiella (Hymen, Megachilidae). American
Midl and N atu r al is t. 22(l) :l8a
Michener CD. 1939b. A revision of the genus Neolarua (Hymenoptera: Nomadidae). Transactions of
the Amer ican Entomo lo gical Society ( I 8 9 0 -) . 65 (4):3 47 42
Michener CD. 1941. A generic revision of the American Osmiinae with descriptive notes on Old
World Genera (Hymenoptera, Megachilidae). American Midland Naturalist.26(l):147-67
Michener CD.1942. North American bees of the genus Ancyloscelzs (Hymenoptera, Anthophoridae).
Pan-Pacific Entomologisr. 1 8: I 08-14
Michener CD. 1943. American bees of the genus Anthocopa with notes on Old World subgenera
(Hymenoptera, Megachilidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of America.36:49-86
Michener CD.1944. Comparative external morphology, phylogeny, and a classification of the bees.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History.82:151-326
Michener CD. 1947. A revision of the American species of Hoplitis (Hymenoptera, Megachilidae).
Revis ion of American Hopl itis. 89 :261-3 17
Michener CD. 1948. The generic classification of the anthidiine bees (Hymenoptera, Megachilidae).
American Museum Novitates. 1 38 1 : 1-29
Michener CD. 1949. A revision of the American species of Diceratosmia (Hymenoptera,
Megachilidae). Annals of the Entomological SocieQ of America.42(3):25544
Michener CD. 1954a. Bees of Panam6. Bulletin of the American Museum of Naturol History.104:l-
175
Michener CD. 1954b. Records and descriptions of North American megachilid bees. Journal of the
Kansas Entomological Society. 27 :65-7 8
Michener CD. 1962. Observations on the classification of the bees commonly placed in the genus
Megachile (Hymenoptera: Apoide a) . Journal of the New York Entomological Society . 7 0(l):17 -
29
Michener CD. 1963. The bee genus Eulonchopria (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Annals of the
Entomological Society of America. 56(6):84449
Michener CD. 1965a. A classification of the bees of the Australian and South Pacific regions. Bulletin
of the American Museum of Natural History.130:1-362v v
v
VMichener CD. 1965b. A generic review of the Dufoureinae of the Western Hemisphere
(Hymenoptera: Halictidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of America.5S(3):32I-26
Michener CD. 1966. The classification of the Diphaglossinae and North American species of the
genus Caupolicana. University of Kansas Science Bulletin.46:717-5I
Michener CD. 1968. Nests of some African megachilid bees, with description of a new Hoplitis
(Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Journal of the Entomological Society of Southern Africa. 3l(2):337-59
Michener CD. 1974. The Social Behavior of the Bees: A Comparative Study. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press
Michener CD. 1978. The parasitic groups of Halictidae. University of Kansas Science Bulletin.
5l:291-339
Michener CD. 1979. Biogeography of the bees. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden.66(3):277-
347
Michener CD. 1981. Classification of the bee family Melittidae with a review of species of
Meganomiinae. Contributions of the Americqn Entomological Institute. 18(3):1-135
Michener CD. 1983. The classification of the Lithurginae. Pan-Pacific Entomologist.59:176-87
Michener CD. 1984. A comparative study of the mentum and lorum of bees (Hymenoptera: Apoidea).
Journal of the Kans as Entomological So ciety. 57 (4):7 05-l 4
Michener CD. 1985. A fourth species of Eulonchopria and a key to the species (Hymenoptera:
Colletidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. 58(2):236-39
Michener CD. 1986a. A review of the tribes Diphaglossini and Dissoglottini (Hymenoptera,
Colletidae) . University of Kansas Science Bulletin.53(a):183-214
Michener CD. 1986b. Family-group names among bees. Journal of the Kansas Entomological
Society. 59(2):219-34
Michener CD. 1986c. New Peruvian genus and a generic review of Andreninae (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea: Andrenidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of America. T9(l):62-72
Michener CD. 1988. The parasitic anthophorid genus Xeromelecta inCuba (Hymenoptera: Apoidea).
Annals of the Entomological Society of America. 3I(3):377-79
Michener CD. 1989. Classification of American Colletinae (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). University of
Kans as Science Bulletin. 53 (l l):622-7 03
Michener CD. 1990. Classification of the Apidae (Hymenoptera). University of Kansas Science
B ull er in. 5 4(4) :7 5 -l 64
Michener CD. 1996. A review of the genera of Brachynomadini and a new South American genus
(Hymenoptera, Apidae, Nomadinae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.69(l):81-96
Michener CD.2002. Duckeanthidium, a genus new to Central America, with generic synonymy and a
new species (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.
75(4):23340 Michener CD.200l . The Bees of the World. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 2nd ed.
Michener CD, Brooks RW. 1984. A comparative study of the glossae of bees (Apoidea).
C o ntributions of the American Entomolo gical Ins titute. 22(1):1 -7 3
Michener CD, Deyrup M. 2004. Caupolicana from Florida (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Journal of the
Kans as Entomological SocieQ. 7 7 (4):7 7 4-82
Michener CD, Fraser A. 1978. A comparative anatomical study of mandibular structure in bees.
Univ ers ity of Kans as Science Bul I etin. 5 I Q \:463-82
Michener CD, Greenberg L. 1985. The fate of the lacinia in the Halictidae and Oxaeidae
(Hymenoptera-Apoidea). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.5S:13741
Michener CD, Griswold TL. 1994. The neotropical Sreirs-like cleptoparasitic bees (Hymenoptera:
Megachi lid ae). E nt o m o I o gi cal So c iety of Was hingt on. 9 6 :67 4-7 8
Michener CD, Moure JS. 1957. A study of the classification of the more primitive non-parasitic
anthophorine bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural
History. 112:395452
Michener CD, Moure JS. 1992. Mexican and Central American species of Chilicola (Hymenoptera:
Colletidae) . Folia Entomoligica Mexicana. 85:17-93
Michener CD, Ordway E. 1964. Some anthidiine bees from Mexico (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Journal of the New York Entomological Society. T2:70-78
Michener CD, Sokal RR. 1957. A quantitative approach to a problem in classification. Evolution.
11(2):130-62
Michez D, Eardley C.2007. Monographic revision of the bee genus Melitta Kirby 1802
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Melittidae). Annales de la Societe entomologique de France.
43(4):3794a0
Michez D, Patiny S. 2005. World revision of the oil-collecting bee genus Macropis Panzer 1809
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Melittidae) with a description of a new species from Laos. Annales de
la Socidtd entomologique de France. a1(l):15-28
Michez D, Patiny S, Danforth BN. 2009. Phylogeny of the bee family Melittidae (Hymenoptera:
Anthophila) based on combined molecular and morphological data. Systematic Entomology.
3aQ):574-97
Milliron HE, Oliver DR. 1966. Bumblebees from northem Ellesmere Island, with observations on
usurpation by Megabombus hyperboreus (Sch6nh.)(Hymenoptera: Apidae) l. The Canadian
E nt o m o I o g is t. 98(2) :207 -13
Minckley RL, Radke WR. 2021. Extreme species density of bees (Apiformes, Hymenoptera) in the
warrn deserts of North America. Journal of Hymenoptera Research. S2:31745
Minckley RL, Reyes SG. 1996. Capture of the orchid bee, Eulaema polychrona (Friese)(Apidae:
Euglossini) in Arizona, with notes on northem distributions of other Mesoamerican bees. Journal
of the Kansas Entomological Society. 69(l ): 1024 v
v
v
v
v
vMitchell TB. 1930. A contribution to the knowledge of neotropical Megachile with descriptions of
new species (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the American Entomological Society
(1 8e0-). s6(3):1 s5-306
Mitchell TB. 1933. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic region. Part I. Classification
and descriptions of new species (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the American
Entomological Society ( I 890-). 59@):29 5-361
Mitchell TB. 1935a. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic Region. Part II. Morphology
of the male sternites and genital armature and the taxonomy of the subgenera Litomegachile,
Neomegachile and Cressoniella (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the American
Entomological Society (1 890-). 6l(l):I4a
Mitchell TB. 1935b. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic region. Part III. Taxonomy of
subgenera Anthemois and Delomegachile (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the
American Entomological Society ( I 890-). 61(3): 1 55-205
Mitchell TB. 1936a. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic region. Part IV. Taxonomy of
subgeneraXanthosarus, Phaenosarus, Megachiloides and Derotropls (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae). Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).62(2):l17-66
Mitchell TB. 1936b. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic Region. Part V. Taxonomy of
subgenus Xeromegachile (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the American
Entomological Society ( I 890-). 62(4):323-82
Mitchell TB.1937a. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic region. Part M. Taxonomy of
subgenera Argyropile, Leptorachis, Pseudocentron, Acentron and Melanosarus (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae). Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).63(1):a5-83
Mitchell TB. 1937b. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic region. Part VII. Taxonomy of
the subgenus Sayapis (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Transactions of the American
Entomo lo gical Society ( I 8 9 0 -) . 63 (2):17 5-206
Mitchell TB. 1937c. A revision of the genus Megachile in the Nearctic Region. Part VIII. Taxonomy
of the subgenus Chelostomoides, Addenda and Index (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Trans actions of the American Entomo lo gical Society ( I I 9 0-) . 63 (4):381421
Mitchell TB. 1943. On the classification of neotropical Megachile (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Annals of the Entomological Society of America.36$):656-971
Mitchell TB. 1956. Notes and descriptions in the megachilid subgenus Chelostomoides
(Hymenoptera: Apoide a). P an- P ac ifi c E nto m o lo gis t. 32 : 129 -3 8
Mitchell TB. 1960. Bees of the Eastem United States, Vol. L North Carolina Agricultural
Experiment Station Technical Bulletin. 141 : 1-538
Mitchell TB. 1962. Bees of the Eastern United States, Vol. 2. North Carolina Agricultural
Experiment Station Technical Bulletin. I 52:l-557
Mitchell TB. 1973. A Subgeneric Revision of the Bees of the Genus Coelioxys of the Western
Hemisphere. Raleigh, Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University Mitchell TB. 1980. A Generic Revision of the Megachiline Bees of the Western Hemisphere. Raleigh,
Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University
Moure JS. 195 1. Notas sobre Meliponinae (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Dusenia. 2:25-70
Moure JS. 1963. Una nueva especie de Eulaema de Costa Rica (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Revista de
B iolo g{a Tropical. 1 1(2):21 l-l 6
Moure JS. 1964. A key to the parasitic euglossine bees and a new species of Exaerete from Mexico
(Hymenoptera-Apoid ea). Rev is t a d e B io I o gi a Tr op i c al. L2(l): I 5- 1 8
Moure JS. 1969. The Central American species of Euglossa subgenus Glossura Cockerell, 1917
(Hymenoptera, Apidae). Revista de Biologla Tropical. l5(2):22747
Moure JS. 1970. The species of euglossine bees of Central America belonging to the subgenus
Euglossella (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Anais da Academia Brasileira de Cincias.42:147-57
Moure JS. 2007. Augochlorini Beebe, 1925.In Catalogue of Bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) in the
Neotropical Region, p. xiv+1058. Curitiba, Brazil: Sociedade Brasileira de Entomologia
Moure JS, Hurd Jr PD. 1,987. An Annotated Catalog of the Halictid Bees of the Western Hemisphere
(Hymenoptera: Halictidae). Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institution Press
Moure JS, Michener CD. 1955. A contribution toward the classification of neotropical Eucerini
(Hymenoptera, Apoid ea. Dus enia. 6:239-33 1
Murray EA, Evanhoe L, Bossert S, Geber MA, Griswold T, McCoshum SM. 2021. Phylogeny,
phenology, and foraging breadth of Ashmeadiella (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Insect
Sys tematics and Divers ity. 5(3)i3, 1 -12
Neff JL. 2009. The biology of <i>Hoplitis,/i> (Robertsonella) simplex (Cresson), with a synopsis of
the subgenus Robertsonella Titus. Journal of Hymenoptera Research. l8 151-66
Neff JL, Larkin LL.2002. Andrena chaparralezsrs new species, a new vernal bee associated with
Asteraceae on the south Texas plains (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Andrenidae). Journal of the
Kans as Entomological Society. 268-7 3
Nogueira DS, Jirnior JEDS, Oliveira FFD, Oliveira MLD. 2019. Review of Scaura Schwarz, 1938
(Hymenoptera : Apidae : Melipon ini). Zo o t axa. 47 12(4) :45 I -9 6
Nogueira DS, Ribeiro CF, Oliveira MLD. 2020. Redescription of Nogueirapis Moure, 1953 with two
new species from the Amazon forest (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini). Zootaxa.
4859(l):1 38-s0
O'Brien LB, Hurd Jr PD. 1965. Caryenter bees of the subgenus Notoxylocopa. Annals of the
Entomological Society of America. 58:17 7 -96
Odanaka KA, Branstetter MG, Tobin KB, Rehan 5M.2022. Phylogenomics and historical
biogeography of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Nomoda (Hymenoptera: Apidae) using
ultraconserved elements. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution.170:101453
Oliveira FF de, Marchi P. 2005. TrCs esp6cies novas de LestrimelittaFriese (Hymenoptera, Apidae)
da Costa Rica, Panam5 e Guiana Francesa. Revista Brasileira de Entomologia. a9Q):14v
v \,
v
v
vOman P, Cushman AD.1946. Collection and Preservation of Insecfs. US Dept. of Agriculture
Onuferko TM. 2017. Cleptoparasitic bees of the genus Epeolus Latreille (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in
Canada. C anadian Journal of Arthropo d I dentification. 30 :142
Onuferko TM. 2018. A revision of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Epeolus Latreille forNearctic
species, north of Mexico (Hymenoptera, Apidae). ZooKeys.755:1-185
Onuferko TM. 2019. A review of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Epeolus Latreille, 1802
(Hymenoptera: Apidae) in the Caribbean, Central America and Mexico. European Journol of
Taxonomy. 563:149
Onuferko TM, Bogusch P, Ferrari RR, PackerL.2019. Phylogeny and biogeography of the
cleptoparasitic bee genus Epeolus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) and cophylogenetic analysis with its
host bee genus Colletes (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Molecular phylogenetics and evolution.
141:106603
Onuferko TM, Packer L, Genaro JA. 2021. Brachymelecta Linsley, 1939, previously the rarest North
American bee genus, was described from an aberrant specimen and is the senior synonym for
Xeromelecra Linsley, 1939. European Journal of Taxonomy.754:l-51
Ordway E. 1966. Systematics of the genus Augochlorella (Hymenoptera, Halictidae) north of Mexico
University of Kansas Science Bulletin. 46:509424
Orr MC, Griswold TL.2015. A review of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Townsendiella (Aprdae,
Nomadinae, Townsendiellini), with the description of a new species from Pinnacles National
P ark. ZooKeys . 5 46:87 -104
Orr MC, Griswold T, Pitts JP, Parker FD. 2016. A new bee species that excavates sandstone nests.
Curr ent B io I o gy. 26(1 7 ) :R7 92-93
Orr MC, Hughes AC, Chesters D, Pickering J, Zhu C-D, Ascher JS. 2021. Global patterns and drivers
of bee distribution. Curuent Biology.3l:1-8
Orr MC, Koch JB, Griswold TL, Pitts JP. 2014. Taxonomic utility of niche models in validating
species concepts: A case study in Anthophora (Heliophila)(Hymenoptera: Apidae). Zootaxa.
3846(3):41t-29
Orr MC, Pitts JP, Griswold T.2018a. Revision of the bee group Anthophora (Micranthophora)
(Hymenoptera: Apidae), with notes on potential conservation concerns and a molecular
phylogeny of the genus. Zootaxa.45I l(1):1-193
Orr MC, Pitts JP, Griswold T. 2018b. Revision of the bee group Anthophora (Micranthophora)
(Hymenoptera: Apidae), with notes on potential conservation concerns and a molecular
phylogeny of the genus. Zootaxa. 45 1 l(1): 1-193
Packer L. 2008. Phylogeny and classification of the Xeromelissinae (Hymenoptera: Apoidea,
Colletidae) with special emphasis on the genus Chilicola. Systematic Entomolog,t.33(l):72-96
Packer L, Darla-West G. 2021. Bees: How and Why to Sample Them. In Measuring Arthropod
BiodiversiQ, eds. JC Santos, GW Fernandes, pp. 55-83. Cham? Springer Packer L, Genaro JA, Sheffield CS. 2007. The bee genera of eastern Canada. Canodian Journal of
Arthropod I dent ification. 3 (3):l-32
Packer L, Monckton SK, Onuferko TM, Ferrari RR. 2018. Validating taxonomic identifications in
entomological research. Ins ect Cons ervation and D ivers ity. 1 I ( 1 ) : 1-l 2
Padial JM, Miralles A, De la Riva I, Vences M. 2010. The integrative future of taxonomy. Frontiers
in Zoology. T(1):l-14
Parizotto DR, Melo GAR. 2020. Revision of the rare anthidiine bee genus Rhynostelis Moure &
Urban (Hymenoptera, Apidae). Revisto Brasileira de Entomologia.64(2):e20190029
Parizotto DR, Melo GA.2022. The bee subtribe Epanthidiina, a new taxon for the Neotropical clade
of Anthidiini (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Megachilinae). Revista Brasileira de Entomologia.
66(2):e20220006
Parizotto DR, Urban D, Melo GAR.2018. Revision of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Austrostelis
Michener and Griswold (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Megachilinae). Journal of Natural History.
52(t-2):53-7r
Parizotto DR, Urban D, Melo GA.2022. Phylogeny and generic classification of the Anthidiini bees
from the Neotropical region (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society.
194(1):80-101
Park M, Bryan D, John L, David B, Mace V, et al. 2012. Wild pollinators of Eastern apple orchards
and how to conserve them
Park MG, Sutter L, Garratt MP, Pufal G, Groot A, et al. 2017. Cross-continental look at pollinator
communities and their services in orchards. Entontology 2017.E5A
Parker FD. 1988. Nesting biology of two North American species of Chelostoma,Hymenoptera:
Megachil id ae. P an - P ac ifi c E nt omo I o gis t . 64 : | -l
Parker FD, Bohart GE. 1979. Dolichostelis, a new genus of parasitic bees (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. 52(1):138-53
Parker FD, Griswold T. 2013. New species of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Srzlzs (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae, Anthidiini) from the Nearctic Region. Zoo taxa. 3 646:52944
Pascarella J.2017. Range extension of the introduced bee species Euglossa dilemma (Hymenoptera:
Apidae) in Monroe County, Florida, with notes of additional range extensions in southem
Florida. Florida Entomolog,sr. 100(1):209-10
Pasteels JJ. 1965. Revision des Megachilidae (Hymenoptera Apoidea) de 1'Afrique noire, I: Les
genres Creightoniella [sicJ, Chalicodoma, et Megachile (s.str.). Musee Royal de l'Afrique
Centrale, Annales, Series Zoologiques. 137 :l-579
Patiny S, Michez D, Danforth B. 2008. Phylogenetic relationships and host-plant evolution within the
basal clade of Halictidae (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Cladis tics. 24(3):25 549
Pesenko YA. 1984. A subgeneric classification of bees of the genus Halictus Latreille sensu stricto
(Hymenoptera, Halictidae) lin Russian]. Entomologicheskoe Obozrenie.63(3):340-57v
V v
v
v
vPisanty G, Richter R, Martin T, Dettman J, Cardinal 5.202I. Molecular phylogeny, historical
biogeography and revised classification of andrenine bees (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae).
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. i 0715 I
Pohl TJ, Larkin LL.2006. A new species of Andrena (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae) from Mexico.
Journal of th e Kans as Entomologic al Society. 7 9 (2):1 07 -12
Polidori C, Geyer M, Schmitt T.2020.Do Sphecodes cuckoo bees use chemical insignificance to
invade the nests of their social Lasioglossumbee hosts? Apidologie.5l:147-62
Popov W. 1961. On the evolution of bee genera Protosmia Ducke and Chelostomopsis Ckll. fin
Russianl. Zoologicheskii Zhurnal. 40:3 59-7 1
Portman ZM, Burrows SJ, Griswold T, Arduser M, Irber AJ, et al.20l9a. First records of the
adventive Pseudoanthidium nanum (Mocs6ry) (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae) in Illinois and
Minnesota, with notes on its identification and taxonomy. The Great Lakes Entomologist.52(l-
2):12-20
Portman ZM, Griswold T. 2017. Review of Perdtta subgenus ProcockerelliaTimberlake
(Hymenoptera, Andrenidae) and the first Perdita gynandromorph. ZooKeys.712:87-111
Portman ZM, Neff JL, GriswoldT.2016. Taxonomic revision of Perdita subgenus Heteroperdita
Timberlake (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae), with descriptions of two ant-like males. Zootaxa.
4214:1-97
Portman ZM, Orc MC, Griswold T. 2019b. A review and updated classification of pollen gathering
behavior in bees (Hymenoptera, Apoidea).Journal of Hymenoptera Research.Tl:171
PrazCJ, Miiller A, Danforth BN, Griswold TL, Widmer A, Dorn S. 2008. Phylogeny and
biogeography of bees of the tribe Osmiini (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution. a9(l): 1 85-97
Ramirez SR, Roubik DW, Skov C, Pierce NE. 2010. Phylogeny, diversification patterns and historical
biogeography of euglossine orchid bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Btological Journal of the
L inne an S o c iety. I 00(3) : 5 52-7 2
Ramos KS, Martins AC, Melo GA. 2022. Evolution of andrenine bees reveals a long and complex
history of faunal interchanges through the Americas during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic.
Molecul ar P hylogenetics and Evolution. I 07 484
Rasmussen C, Cameron SA. 2010. Global stingless bee phylogeny supports ancient divergence,
vicariance, and long distance dispersal. Biological Journal of the Linnean SocieQ.99(l):206-32
Rasmussen C, GonzalezYH.2017. The neotropical stingless bee genus Nannotrigorea Cockerell
(Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini): An illustrated key, notes on the types, and designation of
lectotypes. Zo o t ax a. 4299 (2) :19 1 -220
Rehan SM, Sheffield CS. 2011. Morphological and molecular delineation of a new species in the
Ceratina dupla species-group (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Xylocopinae) of eastern North America.
Zootaxa. 2873( I ):3 5-50 Ribble DW. 1965. A revision of the banded subgenera of Nomia in America (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae) - University of Kansas Science Bulletin. 65:277-359
Ribble DW. 1967. The monotypic North American subgenus Larandrena of Andrena (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea). Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum.6:2742
Ribble DW. 1968a. A new subgenus, Belandrena, of the genus Andrena (Hymenoptera: Apoidea).
Journal of the Kansas Entomological SocieQ.4l,220-36
Ribble DW. 1968b. Revisions of two subgenera of Andrena: Micandreza Ashmead and Derandrena,
new subgenus. Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum. 3:237-394
Ribble DW. 1914. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western Hemisphere: Subgenus
Scaphandrena. Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-). i00(2):101-89
Rightmyer MG. 2004. Phylogeny and classification of the parasitic bee tribe Epeolini (Hymenoptera:
Apidae, Nomadinae). Scientific papers, Natural History Museum, the University of Kansas.
33:1-51
Rightmyer MG. 2008. A review of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Triepeolus (Hymenoptera: Apidae).
Part L Zooraxa. 1 7 10( 1): 1-170
Rightmyer MG, Griswold T, Arduser MS. 2010. A review of the non-metallic Osmia (Melanosmia)
found in North America, with additional notes on palearctic Melanosmia (Hymenoptera,
Megachilid ae). ZooKeys. (60) : 3 7
Rightmyer MG, Griswold T, Brady SG. 2013. Phylogeny and systematics of the bee genus Osmia
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae) with emphasis on North American Melanosmia: subgenera,
synonymies and nesting biology revisited. Systematic Entomology. 3S(3):561-76
Roberts RB. 1969. Biology of the bee genus Agapostemon (Hymenoptera: Halictidae). University of
Kans as Science Bulletin. a8Q 6):698-7 19
Roberts RB. 1972. Revision of the bee genus Agapostemon (Hymenoptera: Halictidae). university of
Kans as Science Bulletin. 49(9):437 -590
Roberts RB, Brooks RW. 1987. Agapostemonine bees of Mesoamerica (Hymenoptera: Halictidae).
Univers i4, o.f Kans as Sc ience Bul I etin. 53 :3 57 -92
Rocha Filho LCD, Packer L.2017. Phylogeny of the cleptoparasitic Megachilini genera Coelioxys
and Radoszkowskiana, with the description of six new subgenera in Coelioxys (Hymenoptera:
Megachilid ae). Zoolo gical Journal of the Linnean So ciety. 1 80(2):3 5 4413
Rodeck HG. 1949. North American bees of the genus Nomada, subgenus Callinomada
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Annals of the Entomological Society of America. aZQ):174-86
Roig-Alsina A. 1989. The tribe Osirini, its scope, classification, and revisions of the genera
Parepeolus and Osirinus (Hymenoptera, Apoidea, Anthophoridae). UniversiQ of Kansas Science
Bulletin. 54:1-23
Roig-Alsina A. 1990. Coelioxoides Cresson, a parasitic genus of Tetrapediini (Hymenoptera:
Apoidea). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.63(2):279-87v
v
v
v
v \,
v
V
v
v
vRoig-Alsina A. 1991. Cladistic analysis of the Nomadinae s. str. with description of a new genus
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.64:23-37
Roig-Alsina A, Michener CD. 1993. Studies of the phylogeny and classification of long-tongued bees.
Univers ity of Kans as Science Bullet in. 5 5 :123-62
Roig-Alsina A, Rozen Jr JG. 1994. Revision of the cleptoparasitic bee tribe Protepeolini: including
biologies and immature stages (Hymenoptera, Apoidea, Apidae). American Museum Novitates.
3099:I-27
Roubik D, Arturo J, Segura L, Camargo JMF. 1997. New stingless bee genus endemic to Central
American cloudforests: phylogenetic and biogeographic implications (Hymenoptera: Apidae:
Mel iponini). Sy s t em at ic E nt om o I o g,t. 22(1) :67 -80
Roubik DW. 1983. Nest and colony characteristics of stingless bees from Panama (Hymenoptera:
Apidae). Journal of the Kansos Entomological Society.56(3):327-55
Roubik DW. 1992. Ecologt and Natural Histoty of Tropical Bees. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press
Roubik DW, Hanson PE. 2004. Orchid Bees of Tropical America: Biologlt qnd Field Guide. Heredia,
Costa Rica: Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad (INBio)
Rozen Jr JG. 1958. Monographic study of the genus Nomadopsrs Ashmead. University of Califurnia
Publications in Entomolog,t. 15:l-202
Rozen Jr JG. 1984. Comparative nesting biology of the bee tribe Exomalopsini (Apoidea,
Anthophoridae). American Mus eum Novitates . 27 98:1-37
Rozen Jr JG. 1992a. Biology of the bee Ancylandrena larreae (Andrenidae, Andreninae) and its
cleptoparasite Hexepeolus rhodogyze (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae): with a review of egg
deposition in the Nomadinae (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). American Museum Novitotes.3038:l-15
Rozen Jr JG. 1992b. Systematics and host relationships of the cuckoo bee genus Oreopasites.
American Mus eum Novitates. 3046:l-56
Rozen Jr JG. 1994. Biologies of the bee genera Ancylandrena (Andrenidae, Andreninae) and
Hexepeolus (Apidae, Nomadinae): and phylogenetic relationships of Ancylandrena based on its
mature larva (Hymenoptera, Apoidea). American Mus eum Novitates. 3 I 08 : 1-1 9
Rozen Jr JG. 1996. A new species of the bee Heterosarus from Dominican amber (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae; Panurginae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.69:346-52
Rozen Jr JG. 2013.Lawal development and nesting biology of the adventive wood-nesting bee
Lithurgus (L.) chrysurzs Fonscolombe (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae: Lithurgini). American
Mus eum Novitates. 37 7 4:2040
Rozen Jr JG, Eickwort KR, Eickwort GC. 1978. The bionomics and immature stages of the
cleptoparasitic bee genus Protepeolus (Anthophoridae, Nomadinae). American Mus eum
Novitates.2640:l-24
Rozen Jr JG, Hall HG. 2014. Nest site selection and nesting behavior of the bee Lithurgopsis apicalis
(Megachilidae : Lithurginae). American Mus eum Nov itates . 37 9 6:1 -24 Rozen Jr JG, Mello MLS. 2014. Polarization microscopy and topochemistry of the cocoon of
Lithurgus chrysurus (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Annols of the Entomological Soctety of
Am e r ic a. I 07 (3):627 -3 4
Rozen Jr JG, Roig-Alsina A, Alexander BA. 1997.The cleptoparasitic bee genus Rhopalolemma:
with reference to other Nomadinae (Apidae), and biology of its host Protodufourea (Halictidae,
Rophitinae). American Museum Novitates. 3194:1-ll
Rozen Jr JG, Wyman ES. 2014. Early nesting biology of the wood-nesting adventive bee, Lithurgus
chrysurus Fonscolombe (Apoidea: Megachilidae: Lithurginae). American Museum Novitates.
3804:1-12
Rust RW. 1974.The systematics and biology of the genus Osmia, subgenera Osmia, Chalcosmia, and
C ep hal o s m i a. Was m ann J o ur nal of B io I o gy. 32 :1 -9 3
Rust RW, Cambon G, Grossa J-PT, Vaissidre BE. 2004. Nesting biology and foraging ecology of the
wood-boringbee Lithurgus chrysurus (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Journal of the Kansas
Entomological Society. 7 7 (3):269-7 9
Ruz L. 1987 - A generic revision of the Panurginae. PhD thesis. University of Kansas, Lawrence
Ruz L. 1990. Redefinicion del genero Xenopanurgrzs (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae) y descripcion de
una nueva especie de Mexico. Folia Entomologica Mexicana. 79:i 51-61
Ruz L. 1991. Classification and phylogenetic relationships of the panurgine bees: the Calliopsini and
allies (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae). Univers ity of Kans as Sc ience Bul letin. 5 4:209-5 6
Sandhouse GA. 1937. The bees of the genera Augochlora, Augochloropsis, and Augochlorella
(Hymenoptera; Apoidea) occurring in the United States. Journal of the lVashington Academy of
Sciences. 27 (2):65-79
Sandhouse GA. 1939. North American bees of the genus Osmia (Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Memoirs of
the Entomolo gic al So ciety of Was hington. 1 :l-l 67
Sandhouse GA. 1941. The American bees of the subgenus Halictus. Entomologica Americana.2l:23-
39
Scarpulla EJ. 2018. Four submarginal cells on a forewrng of Melitoma taurea (Say)(Hymenoptera:
Apidae), and a summary of known records of atypical and variable numbers of submarginal
cells. Insecta Mundi. 0667 :l-28
Schwarz HF. 1926. North American Dianthidium, Anthidiellum, and Paranthidium. American
Museum Novitates. 226:l-25
Schwarz HF. 1932. The genus Melipona: the type genus of the Meliponidae or stingless bees.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. $@)231460
Schwarz HF. 1948. Stingless bees of the Westem Hemisphere. Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural H is tory. 90 : 1 -5 46
Schwarz HF. 1949. The stingless bees (Meliponidae) of Mexico. Anales del Instituto de Biologla,
Mdxico.2A357-70v
v
v
v
v v
v
\,
v
v
\,
\,Sedivy C, Dom S, Miiller A.2013. Molecular phylogeny of the bee genus Hoplitis (Megachilidae:
Osmiini) - how does nesting biology affect biogeography? Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Sociery. 167(l):2842
Shanks Gingras S. 1983. Taxonomic notes on the bee genus Hexepeolus. Wasmann Journal of
Biology. 41:50-52
Shanks SS. 1978. A revision of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Neolarra (Hymenoptera:
Anthophoridae). Was mann Journal of B iolo gy. 3 5 :21246
Shanks SS. 1986. A revision of the neotropical bee genus Osiris. Wasmann Journal of Biolog1,,.44:l-
56
Shanks SS. 1987. Two new species of Osiris, with a key to the species from Mexico (Hymenoptera:
Amthophoridae). Was mann Journol of B io lo gy. 45 (l-2): 1 -5
Sharkey JK, Pindar A, Raine NE. 2020. First Canadian record of the specialist hibiscus bee, Ptilothrix
bombifurmzs (Cresson)(Hymenoptera: Apidae). Journal of the Entomological Society of Ontario.
151:41-48
Sheffield CS, Heron J. 2018. A new western Canadian record of Epeoloides pilosulus (Cresson), with
discussion of ecological associations, distribution and conservation status in Canada. Biodiversity
D at a J o u r n a I . 20 I 8(6) : e22837
Sheffield CS, Heron J, Gibbs J, Onuferko TM, Oram R, et al. 2017. Contribution of DNA barcoding
to the study of the bees (Hymenoptera: Apoidea) of Canada: progress to date. Canadian
E nt om o I o gi s t. 1 49 (6) :7 3 6-5 4
Sheffield CS, Ratti C, Packer L, Griswold T. 2011. Leafcuffer and mason bees of the genus Megachile
Latreille (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae) in Canada and Alaska. Canadian Journal of Arthropod
I d ent ifi c at ion. 1 8 : I -107
Sheffield CS, Rigby SM, Smith RF, Kevan PG. 2004. The rare cleptoparasitic bee Epeoloides
pilosula (Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Apidae) discovered in Nova Scotia, Canada, with
distributional notes. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. TT(3):16l-64
Shinn AF.1964. The bee genus Xenopanurgus. Entomological News.75:73-78
Shinn AF. 1967. A revision of the bee genus Calliopsis and the biology of C. andrenifurmis.
Univers ity of Kans as Sc ience Bullet in. 46:7 53-936
Shuker DM, Cook N. 2014. Evolution: conflict by the sexes, for the sexes. Curuent Biolog,t.
24(23):Rr135-37
Silveira FA. 1993a. Phylogenetic relationships and classification of Exomalopsini with a new tribe
Teratognathini (Hymenoptera: Apoidea). University of Kansas Science Bulletin.55(5):425-54
Silveira FA. 1993b. Phylogenetic relationships of the Exomalopsini and Ancylini (Hymenoptera:
Apidae). Univers ity of Kans as Sc ience Bullet in. 5 5 (5) : 1 63-7 3
Sinha RN, Michener CD. 1958. A revision of the genus Osmia, subgenus Centrosmia. University of
Kansas Science Bulletin. 39:27 5-303 Sipes SD, Tepedino VJ. 2005. Pollen-host specificity and evolutionary patterns of host switching in a
clade of specialist bees (Apoidea: Diadasia). Biological Journal of the Linnean Society.
86(4):487-505
Sipes SD, Wolf PG. 2001. Phylogenetic relationships within Diadasia, a group of specialist bees.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. l9(1): 144-56
Sless TJL, Branstetter MG, Gillung JP, Krichilsky EA, Tobin KB, et al.2022. Phylogenetic
relationships and the evolution of host preferences in the largest clade of brood parasitic bees
(Apidae: Nomadinae). Molecular Phylogenetics ond Evolution. I 66:107 326
Snelling RR. 1966a. A new species of Heteranthidium from California (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Contributions in Science, Los Angeles CounQ Museum of Natural History.9T:1-8
Snelling RR. 1966b. Studies on north American bees of the genus Hylaeus.3. The Nearctic subgenera
(Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences.65(3):164-
75
Snelling RR. 1966c. The taxonomy and nomenclature of some North American bees of the genus
Centris, with descriptions of new species (Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Contributions in
Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History.ll2 l-33
Snelling RR. 1968. Studies on North American bees of the genus Hylaeus,4: The subgenera
Cephalylaeus, Metziella and Hylaeana (Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Contributions in Science, Los
Angeles County Museum of Natural History.144:14
Snelling RR. 1970. Studies of North American bees of the genus Hylaeus,5: The subgenera Hylaeus
s.str. and Paraprosopis. Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
History. 180:1-59
Snelling RR. 1974. Notes on the distribution and taxonomy of some North American Centris
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural His tory. 259 :1 4l
Snelling RR. 1982. The taxonomy of some neotropical Hylaeus and descriptions of new taxa
(Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Bulletin of the Southern Califurnia Academy of Sciences. 81(1):1-25
Snelling RR. 1983. The North American species of the bee genus Lithurge. Contributions in Science,
Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History.343:l-11
Snelling RR. 1984. Studies on the taxonomy and distribution of American centridine bees
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural History. 347 :1-69
Snelling RR. 1986a. Contributions toward a revision of the New World nomadine bees: a partitioning
of the genus Nomada (Hymenoptera, Anthophoridae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles
CounQ Museum of Natural History.376:l-32
Snelling RR. 1986b. The taxonomic status of two North American Lithurge (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae). Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Sciences. S5(1):29-34v
v v
\,
v
v
\,
\,
v
vSnelling RR. 1987. A revision of the bee genus Aztecanthidium (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Pan-
P ac ific Entomo lo gis t. 63 :l 65-7 1
Snelling RR. 1990. A review of the native North American bees of the genus Chalicodoma
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
History. 421:l-39
Snelling RR, Brooks RW. 1985. A review of the genera of cleptoparasitic bees of the tribe Ericrocini
(Hymenoptera: Anthophoridae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural History. 369 :1-34
Snelling RR, Danforth BH. 1992. A review of Perdita, subgenus Macrotera (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History.436:1-
t2
Snelling RR, Rozen Jr. JG. 1987. Contributions toward a revision of the New World nomadine bees,
2:The genus Melanomada. Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
History.384:1-12
Snelling RR, Stage GI. 1995a. A revision of the Nearctic Melittidae: the subfamily Melittinae
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Contributions in Science-Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
CounQ.45l:19-31
Snelling RR, Stage GI. 1995b. Systematics and biology of the bee genus Xeralictus (Hymenoptera:
Halictidae: Rophitinae). Contributions in Science, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
Historlt. 451:1-17
Snelling RR, Zavortink TJ. 1984. A revision of the cleptoparasitic bee genus Ericrocis (Hymenoptera:
Anthophori dae). W a s m ann J o u r n a I of B io I o 9,, . 42(1 -2) : I -26
Snodgrass RE. 1935. Principles of Insect Morphology. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company
Snodgrass RE. 1956. Anatomy of the Honey Bee.lthaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press
Stage GI. 1966. Biology and systematics of the American species of the genus Hesperapis, Cockerell.
University of Califomia, Berkeley
Stange LA. 1983. A synopsis of the genus Epanthidium Moure with the description of a new species
from northeastern Mexico (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Pan-Pacific Entomologist.59:281-97
Stephen WP. 1954. A revision of the genus Colletes in America north of Mexico (Hymenoptera,
Colletidae) . Univers ity of Kans as Science Bulletin. 3 6 :l 49-527
Stephen WP. 1957. Bumblebees of Western America. Oregon State College: Agricultural Experiment
Station, Technical Bulletin. 40:1-162
Stephen WP, Bohart GE, Torchio PF. 1969. The Biolog,, and External Morphology of Bees with a
Synopsis of the Genera of North-Western America. Corvalis, Oregon: Agricultural Experiment
Station, Oregon State University
Steyskal GC, Murphy WL, Hoover EM. 1986. Insects and Mites: Techniques for Collection and
Preservation. Washington, D.C.: US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service Straka J, Bogusch P . 2007 . Description of immature stages of cleptoparasitic bees Epeoloides
coecutiens and Leiopodus trochantericus (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Osirini, Protepeolini) with
remarks to their unusual biology. Entomologica Fennica. 18(4):242-54
Swenk MH. 1912. Studies of North American bees, l: Family Nomadidae. University Studies,
Univers ity of Nebraska, Lincoln. 1 2( i ): 1-1 1 3
Tanner DA, Griswold T, Pitts JP. 2009. A revision of Dianthidium subgenus Mecanthidium Michener
(Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Journal of Hymenoptera Research.18(2):183-91
Thiele R. 2002. Nesting biology and seasonahty of Duckeanthidium thielei Michener (Hymenoptera:
Megachilidae), an oligolectic rainforest bee. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.
75(4):274-82
Thorp RW. 1963. A new species of the genus Trachusa from California with a key to the known
species. Pan-Pacific Entomolog,s/. 39:56-58
Thorp RW. 1966. Synopsis of the genus Heterostelrs Timberlake (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae).
Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.39:13146
Thorp RW. 1969. Systematics and ecology of bees of the subgenus Diandrena (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae). U n tv er s i ty of C a I tfo rn ia P u b I i c at io ns in E nt om o I o gy. 52: I -l 46
Thorp RW, Brooks RW. 1994. A revision of the New World Trachuso, subgenera Ulanthidium and
Trachusomimus (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). UniversiQ of Kansas Science Bulletin.55:271-
97
Thorp RW, Horning DS, Dunning LL. 1983. Bumble bees and cuckoo bumble bees of California
(Hymenoptera, Apidae). Bulletin of the California Insect Sur.vey.23:1-79
Thorp RW, LaBerge WE. 2005. A revision of the bees of the genus Andrena of the Western
Hemisphere. Part XV-Subgenus Hesperandrena. Illinois Natural History Survey Bulletin.
37(2):65-94
Timberlake PH. 1941. Synoptic table of North American species of Diadasia (Hymenoptera,
Apoi dea). B ul I etin of r he B r o o klyn E nt o mo I o gi c al S o c iety. 3 6(l) :2-l 1
Timberlake PH. 1943. Racial differentiation in nearctic species of Dianthidium (Hymenoptera,
Apoidea). Journal of the New York Entomological Society.5l(2):71-109
Timberlake PH. 1947. A revision of the species of Exomalopsis inhabiting the United States
(Hymenoptera, Apoidea). Journal of the New York Entomological Society. 55(2):85-106
Timberlake PH. 1954. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific Coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part I. University of
C al ifo r n ia P u b I ic at io ns in E nt omo I o gy. 9 (6)3 4 5 a32
Timberlake PH. 1955a. A new genus for two species of dufoureine bees from Califomia. Pan-Pacific
Entomologisr. 3 1(3): 105-8
Timberlake PH. 1955b. Notes on the species of Psaenythza of North America. Bullettino del
Laboratorio di Zoologia Generale e Agraria "Filippo Silvestri." 33:398409v
v
v v
\,
v
vTimberlake PH. 1956. A revisional sfudy of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part II. University of
C al ifornia P u b I i c at ions in E nto mo I o gy. I I (fi :2a7 4 5 0
Timberlake PH. 1958. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part III. University of
C al ifornia P u b I i c at ions in E nt o m o I o 9,,. 1 4(5 ) : 3 03-4 I 0
Timberlake PH. 1960. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdito F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part IV. University of
Califurnia Publications in Entomologt. I 7(1): 1-1 56
Timberlake PH. 1961. A review of the genus Conanthalictus (Apoidea: Halictidae). Pan-Pacific
Ento mo lo gis t. 37 (3):1 45-60
Timberlake PH.1962. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part V. University of
Califurnia Publications in Entomologt. 28(1): l-124
Timberlake PH. 1964. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) Part VI. University of
C alfornia Public ations in Entomolog,,. 28(2):1 25-3 88
Timberlake PH.1967. New species of Pseudopanurgus from Arizona (Hymenoptera, Apoidea).
American Museum Novitates. 2298:I-23
Timberlake PH. 1968. A revisional study of the bees of the genus Perdita F. Smith, with special
reference to the fauna of the Pacific Coast (Hymenoptera, Apoidea) part Yll. University of
C al ifu rn i a P u b I i c at ions in Entomo I o gy. 49 :l -19 6
Timberlake PH. 1969a. A contribution to the systematics of North American species of Synhalonia
(Hymenoptera, Apoidea). University of Califurnia Publications in Entomology.5T:l-76
Timberlake PH. 1969b. Metapsaenythia, a new panurgine bee genus (Hymenoptera, Andrenidae).
Entomological News. 80:89-92
Timberlake PH. 1971. Supplementary studies on the systematics of the genus Perdita (Hymenoptera,
Andrenidae). Univ ers ity of C al ifurnia P ub I icotions in Entomolo g,t. 66 :1 -63
Timberlake PH. 1973. Revision of the genus Pseudopanurgus of North Arnerica (Hymenoptera,
Apoidea). Univers ity of Califurnia P ubl ications in Entomolo gy. 7 2:1 -58
Timberlake PH. 1975. The North American species of Heterosaras Robertson (Hymenoptera,
Apoidea). Univers ity of Califu rnia P ublicat ions in Entomologl,t. 7 7 :1 -64
Timberlake PH. 1976. Revision of the North American bees of the genus Protandrena Cockerell
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea). Transactions of the American Entomological Society (1890-).
102(2):133227
Timberlake PH. 1980a. Review of North American Exomalopsrs (Hymenoptera, Anthophoridae).
University of California Publications in Entomolog,t 86:1-158 Timberlake PH. 1980b. Supplementary studies on the systematics of the genus Perdita (Hymenoptera:
Andrenidae), Part IL University of Calfornia Publications in Entomology. 85:1-65
Timberlake PH, Michener CD. 1950. The bees of the genus Proteriades. University of Kansas Science
Bulletin.33:387440
Torchio PF, Youssef NN. 1968. The biology of Anthophora (Micranthophora)flexipes and its
cleptoparasite, Zacosmia maculata, including a description of the immature stages of the parasite
(Hymenoptera: Apoidea, Anthophoridae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society.4l:289-
302
Toro H, Michener CD. 1975. The subfamlly Xeromelissinae and its occurrence in Mexico
(Hymenoptera: Colletidae). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. a8(3):351-57
Trunz V, Packer L, Vieu J, Arrigo N, Praz CJ.2016. Comprehensive phylogeny, biogeography and
new classification of the diverse bee tribe Megachilini: can we use DNA barcodes in phylogenies
of large genera? Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 103:245-59
Urban D. 1961. As esp6cies do g6nero Thygater Holmberg, 1884. Boletim da Universidade Federal
do Parano (Zoologia). 2(12):17 7 -307
Urban D. 1968a. As esp6cies de GaesischiaMichener, LaBerge e Moure, 1955. Boletim da
Universidade Federal do Parand (Zoologia). 3@):79-129
Urban D. 1968b. As esp6cies do gdnero Melissoptila Holmberg, 1884. Revrsta Brasileira de
Entomologia. 13:1-94
Urban D. 1970. As espdcies do g6nero Florilegus Robertson, 1900. Boletim da (Jniversidade Federal
do Parand (Zoologia). 3(12):245-80
Urban D. 1992. Consideragdes sobre Anthidulum Michener, stat. n. e Dichranthidium Moure &
Urban, stat. n. e descrigdes de esp6cies novas (Hymenoptera: Megachilidae). Revista Brasileira
de Zoologia.9:11-28
Urban D. 1995. Grafanthidium, gen. n. de Dianthidiini do Brasil e una especie nova de
Duckeanthidium Moure and Hurd. Revista Brasileira de Zoologia. 12(2):43543
Urban D. 1998. Duas esp6cies novas de Saranthidium Moure & Hurd e notas descritivas . Acta
B io ligica P aranaens e. 27 :l-l 4
Urban D, Graf V. 2000. Albinapis gracilis gen. n. e sp. n. e Hexantheda enneomera sp. n. do sul do
Brasil (Hymenoptera, Colletidae, Paracolletini). Revista Brasileira de Zoologia. 17(3):595-601
Wagner DL, Ascher JS. 2008. Rediscovery of Epeoloides pilosula (Cresson)(Hymenoptera: Apidae)
in New England. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society. 81(2):81-83
White JR. 1952. A revision of the genus Osmia, subgenus Acanthosmiodes. University of Kansas
Sc ience B ul I etin. 3 5 :219-307
Wille A, Michener CD. 1971 . Observations on the nests of Costa Rican Halictus with taxonomic
notes on Neotropical species (Hymenoptera: Halictidae). Revista de Biolog[a Tropical- 18(1-
2):17-3t